High values of private practice litigation force ob-gyns to abandon ship and seek employment elsewhere Galloping medico-legal claims ranging between R50 million and R80 million, coupled with exorbitant medical insurance rates of up to R1 million a year are some of the many reasons specialists are leaving the health profession in droves. Obstetricians and gynaecologists (ob-gyns) are closing down their practices owing to a rising litigation crisis and its related massive financial implications on their operations. Some are now joining the public health sector. The SA Society of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists (Sasog) is now contemplating seeking a law reform to have the litigation risk lowered. In an interview with City Press last week, Sasog spokesperson Heidi Kruger said the situation was untenable. “The increase in litigation of ob-gyns is of great concern to Sasog and is having a negative impact on the profession and the relationship between patient and doctor. “Many obstetricians are electing to leave the profession because of the risks involved and the threat of litigation. This results in changes to the way medical professionals and patients interact with one another. Instead of the relationship being one of trust, the threat of litigation means that obstetricians are more likely to practice defensive medicine.” Defensive medicine is when a medical practitioner performs a treatment or procedure to avoid exposure to malpractice litigation. Ob-gyns therefore conduct more tests, screening and perform Caesarean sections over vaginal deliveries to protect themselves from litigation. However, this has a negative impact on the patients as more tests and screenings result in increased costs the patients have to foot. Kruger said pregnancy and childbirth are complex and dangerous processes of transition, where tragic complications can and do occur. “A bad health outcome is in neither the patient nor the physician’s interest. In fact, the increasingly high settlements mean that there are less funds available for spending on improving outcomes,” said Kruger. She said in some provinces in the country, medical negligence claims exceed the entire health budget of the province. This means that there is less money to invest in resources, education and technology – all of which are requirements for improving accessibility to quality healthcare. Asked why health specialists don’t do quality work that does not lead to litigation, Kruger said: “An increase in litigation does not necessarily mean that there is more malpractice occurring. It means that there is more litigation and that the quantum of the claims is increasing as well. “While in 2015 the highest quantum for a claim would have been in the region of R20 million, it is not uncommon nowadays to see a claim, such as that of cerebral palsy, being as high as R50 million to R80 million.” She said South African medical schools are world-class institutions, and our doctors and specialists are well trained and sought after the world over. However, the country’s health system has many challenges, including shortage of trained staff, an overburdened public health sector, among many other pressing issues. This means that the support needed is not always available. “Sasog believes that the increase in litigation is in part owing to changes to the Road Accident Fund (RAF) legislation, which has prevented lawyers from deriving their incomes from the RAF. We also believe that focus for litigation is on ob-gyns as the quantum of claims is high,” said Kruger. For obstetricians in private practice, indemnity insurance premiums cost up to R1 million per year. This puts enormous pressure on affordability for the patient. Kruger said in the public sector, it is perceived that there is little consequence for a doctor accused of malpractice. “That same doctor can continue to work and this causes frustration for patients who see this as a lack of repercussions for the individual concerned. As a result, it is perceived that the only recourse is litigation. To this end, patients are increasingly aware of their rights and this, we believe, fuels the litigation crisis,” said Kruger. Sasog estimates that there are about 1 000 to 1 100 ob-gyns in South Africa across both the private and public sectors, of whom 674 are its members. Asked what is the required number of ob-gyns per 100 000 population, Kruger said it was difficult to compare optimal numbers according to World Health Organisation standards as South Africa’s health system “is unique”. “The number of ob-gyns per 100 000 people worldwide is calculated on the basis of having a strong midwife support basis. Thus midwives would be doing deliveries supported by an ob-gyn at the top, and a good number of medical doctors in between. In our public sector facilities, the scarcity of human resources means that the system is overburdened,” she said. The national health department’s target is 1.70 ob-gyns per 100 000 people, but currently the ratio is 0.62 ob-gyns per 100 000 people in the public sector. In a 2017 survey conducted by Sasog among its members, of the 330 responses received, 220 specialists said they would stop practising if the litigation crisis did not improve within five years. Kruger said the law reforms Sasog was seeking would involve it working with other societies as well the health department, seeking mediation as a first resort, a dedicated multidisciplinary medico-legal authority and education of the legal fraternity around scientific matters. Sasog has also taken several measures to improve the quality of practice by its members, aimed at bringing down the extent of litigation. One of these is the BetterObs programme, which includes a set of 19 protocols to be adhered to by all members of the delivery team – nurses, midwives, paediatricians and others. “These protocols offer guidelines to deal with the most common complications that occur during delivery. including excessive bleeding, preterm labour and Caesarean section deliveries,” said Kruger.  City Press 