EFF branches in Mpumalanga have expressed unhappiness in the way the province’s leadership has gone about “selecting” delegates for the party’s national conference, instead of allowing democratic processes to unfold. Although the party is portraying a united front in the lead-up to its National People’s Assembly elective conference, set to take place next month at Nasrec, the Mpumalanga members have complained of inconsistencies following the party’s failure to adhere to guidelines. EFF official said the province had failed to follow proper procedures when launching branches. “Some of the branches were not launched but were told to lie about their launch so they could go to the conference. The delegates were hand-picked and forced on us to reach the desired 4 500 number of delegates. “There was never a democratic process; we did not get a chance to choose these delegates who are going to represent us.” A leader in Ehlanzeni echoed these sentiments, telling City Press: “The abuse of power is being normalised in Mpumalanga. Because of individuals presiding over nominations, additional members whom we do not know were introduced to us. Regional command teams are being financially compensated to advocate for members to emerge at the conference as delegates.” Ehlanzeni treasurer-general of ward 16 S’busiso Mbuyane said the number of ghost branches in the province had increased and had “passed audit”, adding that it was unclear how this had happened. Mbuyane accused the province’s chairperson, Collen Sedibe, of “advocating corruption in the branch”. “Sedibe is the one who created a situation where branches have passed audits without following procedure. This is creating a lot of ghost branches in the province. It is wrong for him to impose his will on the province.” Mbuyane said the situation “takes away democracy in the party. Sedibe hand-picked the delegates who will represent the province.” When contacted by City Press, Sedibe refused to comment, except to say that he would address these matters at the December conference “I will not discuss conference issues with the media; I will discuss this at Nasrec,” he said EFF spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi also declined to comment, merely saying: “It is against the culture of the EFF to discuss matters of the EFF with the media.”   City Press 