Here are some of the headlines in your City Press newspaper today: SA’s weapons tech stolen The Special Investigating Unit (SIU) will conduct a probe into allegations that intellectual property for some of Denel’s highly sought-after missiles was stolen by current and former employees and given to a Saudi arms company. Zuma can’t pay school fees A high school near Durban has obtained a default judgment against former president Jacob Zuma and his fourth wife, MaNtuli, over unpaid school fees for their daughter. Ramaphosa doesn’t want to account, says Busi President Cyril Ramaphosa’s attempt to set aside and review Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane’s report relating to his CR17 campaign is nothing short of a leader trying to avoid accountability, according to Mkhwebane. KZN a casualty of negligence Major storm systems will continue to wreak havoc in KwaZulu-Natal unless regional government and residents change their behaviour. Deputy minister’s fatal attraction It’s a tale of a relationship that started amorously, then a pregnancy happened before it degenerated to being totally acerbic and toxic. Now the messy affair has landed on the desk of the president. ‘I cannot work for an evil and heartless person’ TV actress Enhle Mbali Mlotshwa’s domestic worker Mpho Koetsi (40) has described her as an “evil and heartless boss” who is hard to work for, after she claims she was fired for gossiping about her a week ago. Free and ready to fight Former ANC councillor who was sentenced to five years in jail for plotting to murder former North West Premier Supra Mahumapelo is now a free woman after the high court upheld her appeal. But in a dramatic twist, she is now alleging that her arrest and conviction were part of an elaborate conspiracy and she plans to sue the state and claims that witnesses and the prosecutor in her trial were all handsomely rewarded. ‘EFF a carbon copy of ANC’ As the EFF prepares for its second National People’s Assembly to elect its leadership next month, there is a growing sense of unhappiness among the so-called ground forces about the party’s empty promises on land expropriation without compensation and the lifestyle of some of the party’s leaders. Unisa examinations compromised The institution sent out an email to students about the compromised exam and that an investigation is already underway to establish what happened. Bruising bout heads for round three While the DA’s “true liberals” are set to win today’s leadership tussle, the “progressives” are gearing up for their fight back come congress. Biotech ‘spit test’ to detect malaria In the small border town of Musina, a revolutionary piece of biotechnology is being developed that could save hundreds of thousands of lives, particularly those of children, lost to malaria each year. Dodgy lawyers rack up R20bn medico-legal claims The Eastern Cape health department is facing more than R20 billion in medico-legal claims. Living on a prayer What is for most people a normal visit to a clinic turned into a nightmare for a young girl as she was raped while walking through a forest to get to her home. Thousands of university students struggle for food A report compiled by the University of Pretoria’s institutional forum found that about 40% of their students this year did not know where their next meal would come from, while a Wits study in 2012 revealed that poor students scavenged for food from dustbins because they could not afford meals. Up close and personal with Idols top two After overcoming stiff competition and controversy Sneziey and Luyolo face off tonight as they fight to be crowned the best muso in SA. Black and Blue UK actress Naomie Harris has her first lead in a movie, an action-packed drama, and says the film’s fundamental message is to “be the change”. - For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press today!