Auditor-General Kimi Makwetu has been bestowed with a lifetime achievement award by his peers for “sterling work” and his contribution to the industry. He was honoured by the Association for the Advancement of Black Accountants of Southern Africa (Abasa) during an annual convention at Hilton Hotel in Sandton on Tuesday night. Abasa is a non-profit organisation founded in 1985, which aims to develop black professional and aspiring accountants with a view to ensuring that access to the profession is widened to include those who did not have opportunities in the past. Under Makwetu’s leadership, the AG’s office been instrumental in the passing of legislation that could result in the arrest or penalties against serial misusers of public funds. Read: AG battles the looting machine, warns officials to change their ways Makwetu, whose fixed seven-year term as AG comes to an end on November 30 2020, said he was honoured that his industry peers have noticed the institution’s efforts towards the advancement of the country, and the development of the profession. “When we were given the once-in-a-lifetime privilege and task to lead the country’s supreme audit institution, the main focus has always been to make a contribution towards helping to strengthen South Africa’s democracy by enabling sound oversight, accountability and good governance. It is encouraging that my colleagues in the industry have noticed our efforts,” Makwetu said. He added: “While the award is in my name, I accept it on behalf of the team that I am privileged to lead – they are the ones who continue to implement the vision we collectively have for our office and our country. We work together, and all of us do the sterling work that is being recognised by Abasa. To us, this recognition says our efforts are on the right track, but there is still a lot that we need to do to help our country’s drive towards wholesale good governance. And, working closely with others who have a keen interest in the advancement of our country, we are up to this national challenge.” The association’s interim president, Ashley Dicken, said they honoured Makwetu with their 2019 Presidential Award for Lifetime Achievement “for his stellar work” in leading the pre-eminent chapter 9 institution of the country during his term. Read: Auditor-General sets sights on 26 misusers of taxpayers’ money “In particular, under Mr Makwetu’s leadership, the Auditor-General of South Africa has reached a milestone of over 1 000 chartered accountants in its ranks. [Also] as a key institution of accountability in the public service, the recent passing of the Public Audit Act [amendments] has the potential to significantly alter the safeguarding of the nation’s resources through fostering greater accountability amongst the custodians of public resources. It is the view of the Abasa executive committee that such achievements, together with Mr Makwetu’s role as a thought leader in the profession, merit a recognition through the lifetime achievement award,” Dicken said.   Journalist | City Press