Tension has been high since the Qwabe twins’ exited from the Idols competition. What followed were a series of speculations and allegations – some stating that Sneziey Msomi was the real reason behind Viggy’s exit from the show. The emotional Msomi said the drama surrounding Viggy and Virginia’s exit from the competition had taken a toll on her, saying she had even lost weight due to the stress she’s incurred from the rumours about her bullying the twins. “As painful as it has been, I pray that one day South Africa will realise that they hated me for doing absolutely nothing. The only thing I’ve done is sing. If that is bullying then I’m not going to apologise for it,” said the 25-year-old contestant as tears rolled down her cheeks. “It’s been really hard but prayer has been pushing me and I don’t hate the twins, I just pray that one day they will be able to stand their ground and tell the truth. “I’ve always had a strong character because it’s something that I’ve had to build as a big girl in South Africa to stand my ground,” she said. She said she was excited about the weeks to come and that this would be reflected in her debut single should she progress in the competition. Her highlights in the competition When asked who she would miss the most in the competition should she leave this week she lovingly mentioned Mmangaliso Gumbi. “I miss Mmangaliso because we have this God thing in common and I hope that Nolo [Seodisha], Mmangaliso, Luyolo [Yiba] and I can one day work together.” “If I’m not the chosen Idol, I would like Luyolo to win because he has so much in his bag of creativity. “He has so much to give. I’ve seen him evolve in the competition from being this shy guy to him actually opening up to the real beast he is. That’s what we call him in the house, he’s a beast and I would be happy if his craft took him to that level.” The former law student stated that should she win she would like to dispel myths about people not seeing winners and she would like to be that one winner that people would constantly see. One of her greatest highlights on the show has been her grandmother boarding her first flight from King Shaka International Airport in Durban, coming to the show to watch her on stage and she hopes that through her musical success she can turn her grandmother’s house into a home. She said she was grateful for all the sacrifices her grandmother had forgone for her happiness and believes sternly in the life motto, “better days are coming”. Living her mother’s wildest dreams The Umlazi-born singer was raised by her grandmother which had moulded her into an older sister figure for many. “I always said I’m living my mom’s legacy. My mother had me at 16 years old and she was still hoping to become a great musician; so I always believe I’m living the dreams of my late mother.” She said she was grateful for the fans who had stuck by her and her parting words were: “Dear big girl out there, create your own definition of beauty. You are beautiful, enough and great. They almost made me lose that but here I am. Thanks to everyone who did not change their mind because of the rumours.”   City Press 