The ANC Youth League’s national task team meeting in Tshwane yesterday ended on a violent note after one member was shot and killed. The shooting happened after a scuffle broke out between a faction from Hammanskraal and a group from Mamelodi. The national task team has been holding meetings across the country to prepare for the league’s national conference, which is expected to take place next year. An eyewitness told City Press that a number of attendees tried to break up the fight, but the matter escalated when members of the regional executive faction from Hammanskraal started hurling chairs at their opponents. While many members started running out of the hall, the Hammanskraal group followed the opposing faction outside and, minutes later, a gun was fired twice. The eyewitness said: “He [the gunman] was covering it [the gun] with a T-shirt. I could not see what kind of gun it was. It was surprising to me that a person would carry a gun to a meeting. Clearly it means that this person or whoever else they were with did not come here for a meeting, they came there to fight and to kill people.” The source also saw a member believed to be part of the regional executive’s supporters carrying a bottle, which he broke and then began to chase another attendee. Youth league member Chipane Seloane, who was present at the gathering, said the scuffle began after members from Mamelodi decided to break out in song. “The root of the fight is that someone was singing. A comrade from Mamelodi was singing. Comrades from Hammanskraal came and tried to manhandle him,” he said. Seloane believes the matter could have been avoided if the meeting was held somewhere else. It is alleged that members of the Mamelodi group wrote a letter to the task team, alerting them of the violence between warring factions in the area. They also complained about the location of the gathering, but did not get a response from the team. The league’s national youth task team spokesperson, Sizo Mkhize, told City Press that she was not aware of a letter that had been sent to the organisation. “From what I know as the spokesperson of the youth task team, we have not received such a letter that requested a change of venue. That is why we anticipated that the assembly was going to go well in Hammanskraal,” Mkhize said. She said the party would be releasing a statement after they had visited the murdered man’s parents. Seloane said the friction between the two factions was driven by the Tshwane regional executive committee’s intentions to create a façade that the area was well run, while members of the Mamelodi faction were being barred from taking part in important youth league activities. “The leader of the Hammanskraal group, Lesego Makhubela, and his group have been gatekeeping the league. They have basically led through fear to say that, if you don’t attend programmes that we say you attend, they are going to be shunned from the youth league,” he said. The so-called disenfranchised group from Mamelodi were going to use this opportunity to so speak out about the tension in the region. 