The Hawks have not ruled out more arrests in the R600 million Amathole District Municipality toilets scandal. On Friday 10 people appeared in the East London Magistrates’ Court in connection with what has been dubbed “Siyenza” toilets scandal. Siyenza is the company that was awarded the controversial tender to build pit toilets in villages under the Amathole District Municipality in the Eastern Cape. Hawks spokesperson Colonel Katlego Mogale, told City Press on Friday after the 10 suspects had appeared before magistrate Annemarie Elliot that: “We cannot rule out more arrests. But for the 10 that were here, the investigation is complete. There are still some preliminary issues to deal with. That is why I am saying we cannot rule out other arrests. This is a process and it all depends on the 10 that are there, you never know.” The group were charged with fraud, corruption and money laundering under the Prevention of Organised Crime Act. The arrests followed simultaneous intelligence-driven raids in the Eastern Cape, Gauteng, Mpumalanga and KwaZulu-Natal. The raids were conducted by a multi-disciplinary team which included Crime Intelligence and SA Police Service detectives on Thursday. In a statement on Thursday after the arrests, the Hawks said: “The operation follows a complaint by the National Treasury after it transpired that the suspects allegedly colluded in accessing the Amathole District Municipality funds through flaunting of procurement processes afterwards they were awarded a contract for ventilated improved toilets in the Eastern Cape. The Hawks’ preliminary investigation discovered that more than R600 million was to be awarded for the contract, of which R286 million has already been paid to the suspects.” According to the Hawks, the asset forfeiture process is already underway. Luxolo Tyali, regional spokesperson for the National Prosecuting Authority in the Eastern Cape, said the acting regional director, Advocate Indra Goberdan, was confident that the excellent working partnership between the investigating agencies, the prosecution and AFU would ensure that perpetrators of corruption and organised crime are brought to justice as the efforts to reclaim the state are materialising. Among those accused are Ntsokolo Magwangoana, the municipal manager; Nkosinathi Soga, the chief financial officer; Mpumelelo Shezi, director of engineering services, Lulama Taleni, director of corporate services and Ongama Mahlawe, acting chief executive officer of the Municipal Infrastructure Support Agency. All the accused were each granted bail of between R10 000 and R40 000. They are back in court on February 5 next year.   