Eleven people, among them three Transnet executives, are on the list of candidates being considered to replace the state-owned logistics company’s fired chief executive officer (CEO) Siyabonga Gama. Following the closing for application at the end of May, City Press has learnt that the 11 names were included in a “long list” for possible employment. Three sources privy to the CEO search process said interviews were conducted on August 13 by the Transnet board – with the assistance of independent and external experts professor Nick Binedell from the Gordon Institute of Business Science (Gibs) and Nosipho Damasane, former CEO of Richards Bay Coal Terminal. “The process included a competency-based interview process and personality assessment to identify leadership strengths and developmental areas,” one source said. “As matters stand, one of them is expected to be announced as the CEO of Transnet.” The two other sources said Patrick Dlamini of the Development Bank of SA and former Transnet executive Simo Lushaba were leading candidates to replace Gama. The others on the list include acting Transnet CEO Mohammed Mahomedy, acting chief operating officer Richard Vallihu and chief customer officer Mike Fanucchi. External candidates are Dlamini, Lushaba, Dolly Mokgatle, Nompumelelo Mpofu, Karl Socikwa, Billy Mawasha, Tobias Becker and Devan Pillay. Gama was fired in October following a protracted legal battle with the Transnet board after he was implicated in the irregular procurement of the 1 064 locomotives. The contract was initially for R38.6 billion but it ballooned to R54.5 billion. In a reply to City Press on Saturday the Transnet board chairperson, Popo Molefe, said: “The process of filling several executive positions is still not complete. Transnet will inform its staff and the public once the process has been concluded.” Dlamini has been at the Development Bank of SA since 2012; prior to that he was CEO of Air Traffic and Navigation Services. Lushaba worked for seven years as general manager for operations at Transnet Freight Rail’s predecessor, Spoornet. He is a non-executive chairperson of Signium Africa and managing director of consulting firm Talent Growth Partners. Who are the others: Mpumi Mpofu has a vast experience in civil service where she worked as secretary of defence and director-general for the housing and transport departments. She is now director-general for planning, monitoring and evaluation. Makgatle is former CEO of Spoornet who has served as an independent board member of Sasfin Holdings. Socikwa has many years of experience at Transnet where he previously acted as interim head of Transnet National Ports Terminal in 2009 and was group executive for the commercial unit. Billy Mawasha is managing director for Richards Bay Minerals and has served in several key positions at Anglo American’s Kumba Iron Ore.  Senior journalist | City Press