Some of the headlines in the City Press Sport section today: Irvin Khoza: PSL players must exit with R2m in their account Following the PSL’s declaration of R1bn revenue, Timothy Molobi and Daniel Mothowagae sat down with the Iron Duke as he talked all things domestic club football business. Battered Bafana regroup for Sudan clash Ideally, Bafana Bafana head coach Molefi Ntseki had hoped to start the 2021 Afcon qualifiers on a positive note, but says the defeat to Ghana midweek is still a good lesson to build on ahead of the game against Sudan in Soweto today. From kitman to Bafana team manager Bafana’s new team manager Levy Ramajoe shares the inside story of the team’s latest camp and takes Daniel Mothowagae through his personal journey that started at a steel factory to being Safa’s go-to man. Uncertainty lurks in SA U23 chase for Tokyo Olympics ticket In the midst of the South African Under-23s celebrating their semifinal berth at the ongoing age-limit Afcon in Egypt, head coach David Notoane remains uncertain about what effect the end of the latest Fifa window will have on his squad. No guaranteed windfall for SA Rugby after Boks World Cup win Squad members set to coin it but sponsors could be reluctant to pay more. Smith’s withdrawal from director of cricket race not a total disaster Graeme Smith’s most significant leave – his decision to pull out of the race to be Cricket SA director of cricket – since his retirement has led to predictable wailing by the cricketing public about a missed opportunity, writes Simnikiwe Xabanisa in his Side Entry column. Netball SA’ glorious year After capping off a memorable season by scooping four SA Sports Awards in Durban last week, the Spar Proteas are already focusing on hosting the 2023 Netball World Cup, by Palesa Dlamini. Madrid legend doubts silverware will materialise Fernando Sanz might not be a name you recognise off the bat, but with a quick search on Google – or if you’re a true Madridista – the name, especially the surname, will set off distant bells in the memory bank. The former Real Madrid defender tells City Press in an exclusive interview why the La Liga powerhouse will not win a trophy this season. Retired Fifa ref unpacks the role of Safa referees technical committee Safa refs technical sub-committee chair Jerome Damon shares with Timothy Molobi the work behind the scenes to address match officials’ shortcomings. Pitso takes break as winding programme awaits Downs during the festive season Ahead of the demanding schedule facing his team, Mamelodi Sundowns coach Pitso Mosimane decided to take a sho’t left out of the city so he could relax and stay away from the hectic football space.