President Cyril Ramaphosa says the appointment of a new permanent group chief executive at Eskom is an important step towards restoring stability and forging a sustainable path at the strategic entity. “The Eskom board, working with government, continues to pursue a turnaround plan to address its huge debt, its liquidity problems and its operational challenges…. We are undertaking these measures in support of the overriding effort to address the unemployment crisis,” he said on Thursday. The president, speaking at a meeting with the Black Business Council at the Union Buildings in Tshwane, said the security of energy was critical if local industries were to flourish. Minister in the Presidency Jackson Mthembu echoed his words while briefing the media on the outcomes of the latest Cabinet meeting. “The appointment of a permanent CEO is an important first step in strengthening Eskom, dealing decisively with government and financial management challenges at the utilities which will ensure a stable electricity supply for the nation,” said Mthembu. Read: Youth league defies ANC, criticises appointment of new Eskom CEO Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan earlier this week announced Andre de Ruyter as Eskom’s new group chief executive. Read: Everybody has to come to the party to fix Eskom, says Gordhan De Ruyter is currently the CEO at Nampak, the continent’s largest packaging company. He has held senior legal, marketing, and operations positions at Sasol in South Africa, Germany and China – with his last position at Sasol being the Senior Group Executive Operations in South Africa. He will commence his duties at Eskom on January 15. Mthembu said de Ruyter brings to the position significant international experience; extensive experience of dealing with governments and regulators in a variety of jurisdictions; turnaround skills based on rigorous cost cutting, margin improvements, and organisational restructuring, a track record of delivering sustainable profits and value for stakeholders; strong strategy and execution competencies with a strategic focus on conceptualising and integrating corporate operating models and strategic delivery. “Cabinet believes that Mr de Ruyter will work with the leadership of Eskom to drive the proposed Eskom interventions as spelt out in the Eskom paper titled Roadmap for Eskom in a Reformed Electricity Supply Industry,” said Mthembu. Cabinet, he said, would continue to support Eskom in all its endeavours to stabilise its capacity and ability to provide uninterrupted energy supply. – SAnews.gov.za   City Press 