The contract of Monica Newton, the head of Gauteng’s department of sport, arts, culture and recreation, has been “redetermined”. In addition, three senior departmental officials have been placed on precautionary suspension, following the release of a report into unauthorised recordings that were leaked to the media. In March 2019, Newton and a colleague were accused by then MEC Faith Mazibuko of having failed to facilitate the construction of “combi courts”, to be used for the ANC’s election campaign. In a leaked audio clip, Mazibuko was heard making derogatory remarks to her staff. The audio that recorded the incident was found to be unauthorised, after a probe was conducted. The department also found that unauthorised security cameras had been installed, according to the department’s current MEC, Mbali Hlophe. “Following from the [Mazibuko] recording, security cameras were also found to have been affixed to the building. I questioned individuals concerned about why these cameras were put in place and how they were authorised,” she said. Hlophe said she reported the matter to Gauteng premier David Makhura, who decided to redetermine her contract. Newton was appointed as head of department in August 2017, following the 2016 sacking of her predecessor, Namhla Siqaza, for misconduct. Makhura’s spokesperson, Vuyo Mhaga, told City Press: “It is an agreement between an employer and an employee, who agreed amicably to part ways.” Mhaga said it was part of a restructuring process to implement the Growing Gauteng Together plan, announced by the premier during his state of the province address in July. To this end, Makhura had started signing performance delivery agreements with all members of his executive as well as all heads of department. Hlophe said she called a departmental meeting last week to inform staff members of “management changes” involving Newton and the three suspended executives, who are: the department’s chief financial officer (CFO), Priyanka Lutchman; director of supply chain management Koketso Lekalakala; and director of security John Mofokeng. The department’s chief director of corporate services, Chris Lekalakala, resigned during the investigation into the camera installations. A source within the department told City Press that Mofokeng was also being investigated for his involvement in a nepotism scandal, in which he is alleged to have employed his daughter. “I placed the CFO on precautionary suspension as she was a signatory [to the purchase of the cameras], the supply chain director because, obviously, there were procurement issues, and the director of security. The fourth individual who was involved in the matter resigned,” said Hlophe. She said the four of them did not follow the correct procedure to have the cameras installed. “Before any surveillance cameras are installed, certain entities have to be made aware that this is happening. These include the SA Police Service, the State Security Agency (SSA), and the SA Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee, which is the department’s executive authority,” said Hlophe. Newton will be replaced by former head of department Vuyani Mpofu, who currently serves as the deputy director-general for education support in Gauteng’s department of education. Newton is expected to serve her notice period, which runs until Friday. “I am still awaiting the findings of the investigation, which includes a probe into allegations of corruption,” Hlophe said. Within a month, the investigation into the security cameras will be concluded, and the outcomes of the corruption allegations will be released by the SSA and the Special Investigating Unit. Hlophe said it was time for the “chapter of wrongdoing in the department to be closed” and the sixth administration to realise its goals. Makhura said that, in addition to cleaning up corruption in Cabinet and growing Gauteng’s economy, he was planning to subject senior officials to lifestyle audits as part of “entrenching ethical leadership”.  Political journalist | City Press 