EFF leader Julius Malema has turned his back on the DA, saying that the red berets were ready to govern in the City of Joburg and that they wanted the DA to support their mayoral candidate. The party said it would be announcing its candidate before voting takes place next week. “We reaffirm our position that the EFF will field a candidate for the mayoral position of the City of Johannesburg when the current mayor vacates his position on November 27 2019,” Malema said at a briefing held at the Nasrec Expo Centre on Thursday. Malema also questioned why the EFF had to always form coalitions to assist the DA with winning positions while they were not afforded the same courtesy. “There’s this nonsense I’m not prepared to entertain of why we are not supporting the DA. We supported the DA and it’s their turn now to support the EFF, it’s only fair. Why should we always support the white man?” he said. Malema explained the conditions under which the EFF would enter a coalition, saying if they were afforded the opportunity to run Johannesburg by the DA or the ANC they would support them in Tshwane. “Why can’t the white man find it in himself to support a black man? We supported the DA and the only fair thing the DA can do is support us. We will only vote with them if they support us to get Johannesburg; we will vote with them to get Tshwane,” Malema said. Malema has confirmed that the EFF has already met with the DA, but said they would not be pursuing any talks to persuade political parties to vote with them. This despite the party only having 30 seats in the City of Joburg council. “We are also not talking to the ANC. If the ANC wants to come on board, it must come on board supporting the EFF … Are we not leaders who are capable to lead? We are going to field a candidate and we call upon the DA and ANC to support our candidate,” he said. On Tuesday, the DA in Gauteng elected Joburg’s finance MMC Funzela Ngobeni as its candidate to replace Mashaba. The party – which also saw its leader Mmusi Maimane resign due to internal divisions over the DA’s direction and race issues – said it had dispatched a team to negotiate with the EFF. Mashaba ditched the party after Helen Zille was elected as DA federal council chair. While the ANC has confirmed three candidates have been selected to compete for the position, it is still up to the regional executive committee to make the final decision. The ruling party has managed to secure the votes of smaller parties, but their future still lies in the hands of the IFP who they have been courting since Mashaba’s resignation. The ANC has 122 seats in council, the DA has 103, the IFP has five, the African Independent Congress has four and the six smaller parties have one seat each.   Political journalist | City Press