 What you can expect in your City Press newspaper today: Malema faces an EFF rebellion EFF leader Julius Malema is facing an open rebellion within his party for the first time, after the student wing made it clear that it would oppose his intentions to shut it down. Cyril feared Zuma promotions were to undermine him Former National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) head Shaun Abrahams says President Cyril Ramaphosa feared that the appointment of senior prosecutors concluded by his predecessor, former president Jacob Zuma, were “fast tracked” to counter his political victory as the new president. Cosatu now open to idea of some SOEs being partly privatised Labour federation Cosatu has made a 180-degree about-turn on the subject of nonperforming state-owned enterprises (SOEs), saying some of them can benefit from partial privatisation. Denel lost R30bn after demands for Gupta bribes State arms company Denel lost more than R30 billion in contracts to supply weapons because a former executive insisted that kickback contracts be signed with the Gupta family. Heads roll as sports MEC takes charge The contract of Monica Newton, the head of Gauteng’s department of sport, arts, culture and recreation, has been “redetermined”. Aspirant farmer hopes for Ramaphosa as a potential customer “I have already started breeding Bonsmara cattle and my aim is to be a registered stud farmer at 21,” says young farmer Thabo Dithakgwe. Dirty tricks as ANC race heats up Mpumalanga Premier Refilwe Mtshweni-Tsipane’s campaign to lead the ANC in the province is beset by allegations of using state power and eccentric behaviour by some of her lobbyists, but she steams ahead unfazed. Botswana closes down Bushiri’s church It never rains, but pours for flamboyant “prophet” Sheperd Bushiri's Enlightened Christian Gathering Church in Botswana, as the government closes down all of his church branches following the deregistration of the organisation last year. Threat to water infrastructure Critical water infrastructure such as dams, tunnels, canals and water pumps are under threat as the department of water and sanitation is embroiled in a legal battle over a maintenance contract that expired two years ago. ‘Don’t judge me on the melanin in my skin’ Newly minted interim DA leader John Steenhuisen wants a chance to prove himself, and his plea is that people should not rush to judge him based on “the amount of melanin in my skin”. Iconic Newtown Precinct plunges into darkness: The Newtown Precinct, which still houses creative institutions such as The Market theatre, the embattled Museum Africa, Bassline and Moving into Dance Mophatong, as well as the Dance Factory and the Newtown Music Factory, has been plunged into darkness. ‘We want to be out and proud in eSwatini’ Last weekend’s first LGBTIQ conference in eSwatini set the agenda for a fight for access to equal human rights. In a country where stigma is rife and gay sex remains illegal, it’s an act of resistance to be out and proud in the kingdom of eSwatini, an act carried out bravely by 23-year-old Zanokuhle Soko, a Swazi transgender woman who expresses her identity unapologetically. For the love of music  Born and bred in Mabopane, north of Pretoria, Ofentse Pitse is making trombones tremble and wind chimes churn by virtue of the orchestra she conducts and owns – the first black woman to do so.For Pitse, music is as much part of her identity as the blood flowing through her veins. A municipality in crisis Despite resisting at first, politicians in a strife-torn Limpopo municipality changed their minds and paid R1.4 million owed to an employee who was unfairly dismissed in 2016. The day Christmas came early  A cash-strapped Mpumalanga municipality may need pickaxes and shovels to recover about R18 million in salaries that were paid twice to its employees last month. An error by officials in the Nkomazi Local Municipality’s finance department saw workers getting paid their salaries on the 15th instead of the 25th. Luyolo Yiba walking on sunshine   Idols SA season 15 winner Luyolo Yiba has a spring in his step and a sparkle in his smile. “Just as my single Sunshine Through the Rain says, my dreams will not be in vain. I believe that God will make a way and that everything is how it is supposed to be. For now I’d like to focus on my career and push my single, which is currently number two on the iTunes charts,” said Yiba when asked if he had any fears about falling from his new found glory.   AG to use new powers: The worsening 2018/19 provincial and national governments’ financial year reports have raised questions about the efficacy of the new powers granted to the Auditor-General’s office. - For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press newspaper today