 Here are some of the headlines in your City Press today: Ramaphosa flexes his muscles President Cyril Ramaphosa’s ANC camp flexed their muscles at the ANC’s national executive committee meeting this weekend, reading the riot act on so-called loose cannons within the party and calling for discipline. City Press has learnt that party secretary-general Ace Magashule was among those taken to task. Fake soldier causes panic The alleged infiltration of the SA National Defence Force by a rogue soldier is being investigated by army intelligence services and the police. He was arrested when he tried to worm his way into the infantry group that was to accompany President Cyril Ramaphosa during his inauguration last weekend. R500m taken from the poorest A pension fund boss entrusted with looking after billions of rands allegedly splurged R21 million belonging to orphans of mine workers on a luxury mansion in a security estate in Alberton, Ekurhuleni. From champs to relegation A Limpopo second-division club has been docked a record 62 points and, as a result moved from champions to automatic relegation from the ABC Motsepe League to the Castle Regional League. Sho Madjozi shines at the Samas The country’s biggest award show turned 25 this weekend – and a young Tsonga star cemented her fame while several legends continued to show why they’re legends. ANC Youth League still battles to stay afloat While countering calls to disband the league, its secretary-general admits to the mother body having helped it settle a R5m debt. Smiling his way back to Education Popular Gauteng education MEC Panyaza Lesufi says he is ready to serve anywhere the ANC or the South African public want him to. Krejcír’s henchmen in freedom bid Radovan Krejcír’s six co-accused are claiming that former police commissioner Riah Phiyega and her former top cops allegedly fabricated information and coached witnesses for three months to get them behind bars. SA Indian cinema soars Seven weeks into its run, the film Kandasamys: The Wedding is still selling like hot cakes – so much so that Nu Metro’s website warns filmgoers to rather book for off peak screenings, citing a high demand for tickets and “record-breaking attendances”. Hard times hit mining villages People are living on grants. Money is tight. Hope is fading. Mine closures are leaving villagers hungry and desperate. Ian Khama might be returning Botswana’s former president won’t rule out joining new party, but doesn’t want to rule from the grave. . For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press today