The man accused of the murder of anti-apartheid activist Ahmed Timol, Joao Rodrigues, will be standing trial. The South Gauteng High Court dismissed Rodrigues’ application for a permanent stay of prosecution by on Monday morning. Rodrigues, who is in his eighties, made his appearance in court following the reopened inquest into the death of Timol, who died after plunging to his death from the 10th floor of the notorious John Vorster Square police station in Johannesburg in 1971. The initial inquest into Timol’s death, which was conducted in 1972, found that Timol had committed suicide. After decades of fighting the ruling and hiring their own private investigator, the Timol family led by his nephew Imtiaz Cajee, managed have the inquest into his death reopened in 2017. Some compelling evidence was submitted, including findings that Timol was victim of a brutal attack and was killed after being pushed to his death. Rodrigues, who is a former apartheid security police officer and was the last person to see Timol alive, testified during the reopened inquest that he had seen Timol jump from the window of room 1026, but in 2017 Judge Billy Mothle reversed the 1972 ruling and ruled that Timol was murdered. His ruling was based on evidence that was presented in court by several forensic experts and testimony from friends and colleagues, who were also held at the state security branch during Timol’s time there. Rodrigues said that he couldn’t save Timol from falling out of the window as he had tripped on a chair in the room. On July 30 2018 Rodrigues was indicted for murder and defeating the ends of justice. He had argued in his application that the delay in bringing him to trial had infringed on his right to a fair trial. He also argued that he could not remember the events very clearly because it happened so long ago. This was dismissed but Judge Seun Moshidi, while handing down his judgment, said it would be factored into his sentencing. Judge Mothle had also ruled that two other officers who were also implicated in Timol’s murder, Seth Sons and Neville Els, should be charged for perjury, but the National Prosecuting Authority was yet to conclude its investigations into the pair.