Cape Town’s premier film event owes the industry millions and this week threatened creditors talking to City Press with legal action. An invitation sent out this week saw many in Cape Town’s film industry rallying together to speak out against the Mother City’s premier film event, the Cape Town International Film Market and Festival, which they say has exploited them. The invitation was to a three-day women in film business networking event organised by the festival in conjunction with the City of Cape Town and it announced that, on Thursday, there would be the “launch of the Cape Town International Film Market and Festival 2019 with hosting guest of honour executive mayor Dan Plato”. In the end, the mayor didn’t pitch, but it’s unclear if that’s because of an outraged letter sent to him from two senior former staffers of the festival. This week, numerous service providers and workers told City Press the festival should not be allowed to go ahead this year until they have been paid for last year’s event. The festival’s payment schedules seen by City Press put the debt at more than R3.5 million. Speaking to about 20 sources, we were able to independently confirm that at least R3 million is owed. Some sources – like a leading travel agent owed almost R450 000 – didn’t want to use their names as they hoped they would still be paid. The festival’s marketing boss and one of the directors of the company that owns it, Jehad Kasu, denied the allegations, saying: “We owe some service providers money for 2018. It is inaccurate that it exceeds, or is close to, R3.5 million.”  The other owners are executive chairperson Rafiq Samsodien, Nazeera Hartley Roach and Leon van der Merwe. City Press also saw numerous notifications to creditors thanking them for their patience while the festival makes a plan to pay them. But in the course of our investigation, we found that the festival has been running up serious debt since its inception in 2017, another claim Kasu denied. Industry insiders say they are trading recklessly and must not be allowed to continue. The City of Cape Town confirmed that it contributed R1 million of public money to last year’s festival. Numerous other state arts bodies also contributed in various ways to the event, which sees itself as “Cannes in South Africa”. The letter to the mayor was written by Nikki Froneman, who was the project manager of last year’s festival, and Elias Ribeiro, its market director. They expressed support for the event, but not its directors, who they believe went into last year’s event knowing full well that they did not have sufficient funds. Kasu denied this: “We are observing standard processes and procedures with respect to funding that we applied for in 2017, and was due to be disbursed in 2018, to cover the 2018 festival expenses. Due to a backlog in this process, that was only communicated to us shortly before the 2018 event. We are in the position we find ourselves currently.” Insiders who worked on the festival doubt that there was any further funding confirmed. Between them, Froneman and Ribeiro are still owed close to R400 000 in consulting fees after months of tireless work on the festival, joining a small army of workers who suffered the same fate. They include many film students who told City Press how they had to get their own food and transport to work at the festival with a basic wage (R120 per eight-hour shift) – and who didn’t see a cent. “Basically, we paid to work for them for free,” said a student from a film school in False Bay. Muendo Muindi, the student who ran the volunteer programme, said almost none of the students had been paid, and many lived in poverty and desperately needed the money. It is believed they are owed about R50 000. “They keep shifting the blame and are playing a cat-and-mouse game with creditors,” Muindi said. “For most of us, we wanted exposure to our industry. It was our first job in the industry and we were exploited.” Four top film makers who funded their own flights to Cape Town said they had not been reimbursed. Sean Drummond, Faye Kabali Kagwa and Sarah Summers are the film workers who won a R30 000 prize for audience engagement strategies at the festival. They confirmed they were still owed their prize money. The film buff who wrote the festival programme, Sarah Dawson, confirmed she had not been paid for her work, as did the festival’s graphic designer Mary Everard. Sources said that the festival was unlawfully using Everard’s branding to launch this year’s event, as the intellectual property resides with her until she is paid for her work. Kasu said the payment process “is moving forward”. “We remain committed to settling all creditors as we run the festival on sound values and ethics,” he said. On the issue of Everard’s design work, which was featured in the invitations sent out this week, he said: “We are currently taking advice on this matter.” City Press spoke to transport and technical service providers, who all confirmed they were out of pocket after not being paid. One five-star hotel told us it had instituted legal action against the festival and eventually settled for less than what it was owed. Many others told of the hardships they suffered after not being paid, including how their families had been affected. Speaking from the UK, tour operator and event organiser Joe Hannan told City Press about a protracted legal battle with the festival that left him broke and depressed for the first time in his life, unable to even buy his children Christmas presents in 2017. He said he had to retrench four staff members as a result of the money owed to him by the festival organisers. He worked on the 2017 festival and, eventually, his lawyer advised him to take the festival to the high court to have it provisionally liquidated. Hannan said: “It has taken me since October 2017 to receive a settlement that prevented their full liquidation on June 11. It was a long, frustrating and expensive process.” Hannan said he was approached by Samsodien and his business partners just five weeks before the inaugural festival. “I was not aware that they had neither budget nor a plan in place. But they advised me that sponsorship was forthcoming and any costs I incurred would be refunded as soon as possible.” So Hannan used his own money to pay deposits for service, as well as for flights and hotels, as suppliers were threatening to withdraw. He said that, in the beginning, the festival “did in fact start to refund my company, so I had no reason to doubt the legitimacy of their verbal agreement with me”. He put up R1.7 million of his own company’s money. “By December 2017, I had not received the balance of R410 000, despite me pleading for the money that I needed to run my business.” In the end, his legal bills amounted to a further R250 000. Eventually, he settled for R350 000 from the festival as it had become clear he was not going to be able to “squeeze water from a stone”. He withdrew his liquidation application. Kasu in part blames Hannan’s legal action for today’s nonpayments. “As a result of the order brought against us by him, we were unable to transact.” Sources told City Press how the following year, the festival tried to discredit Hannan, accusing him of misconduct. When asked about this, Hannan was furious that his reputation was being damaged after he had bent over backwards to help the event. When asked to respond, Kasu said: “The matter has since been discharged and I wish not to discuss it.” He was, however, clear that this year’s festival would go ahead: “We announced the dates of the festival, and one of our venues is booked and located within the Waterfront.” However the V&A Waterfront, which hosted the event last year, denied that it had confirmed the festival. City of Cape Town spokesperson Luthando Tyhalibongo said: “This is an unfortunate situation and the city hopes that the parties involved are able to reach an amicable agreement. “Funding has been identified for the 2019 event. However, the organisation has been made aware that it will have to comply with all the relevant regulatory requirements if the city is to support the event.” This week, three sources said they had been threatened with defamation lawsuits if they spoke to City Press. Kasu denied anyone had been bullied, saying that nondisclosure agreements had been signed and the festival wished to prevent internal documents from being leaked. Industry insiders this week said they were tired of excuses and that the organisers of the event cared more about the red carpet than about the industry. Kasu vehemently denied this.