Convener of Brand Summit South Africa Solly Moeng describes the state of the nation address as not being convincing that President Cyril Ramaphosa is in control of the country. “…the state of the nation speech did not go enough in [to] sending the message out that the president is in control of things and that his government would be speaking in one voice, from one script, in addressing the many things that currently confuse people at home and abroad.” The state of the nation address took place after the inaugural Brand Summit South Africa was held at Bowman Gilfillan’s law firm in Sandton over two days earlier this month. The summit which functions as a platform to discuss South Africa’s evolving image and identifying avenues to enhance the country’s attractiveness globally, also took place after the sixth democratic election. “There is a need for more political and economic policy coherence, it did not come out strongly enough in the state of the nation address. It didn’t help that several highly discredited persons seriously implicated in state capture and other forms of wrongdoing were confirmed as chairs of important parliamentary oversight committees just a day before,” Moeng added. Moeng told City Press, the aim of the summit is to analyse the evolving image of South Africa’s country brand and its economic repercussion. “You can’t build an inclusive economy if investors are not putting money into the country, you can’t build an inclusive economy if racism is too high or if the things said about South Africa around the world are not good, or if South Africans in the diaspora don’t say good things about South Africa. The summit looks to bring diverse groups from politicians to private sector individuals to the youth to contribute to robust conversation on where we are as a country brand and, frankly, talk about what needs to be done and how we all have a role to play”. Some of the panellists at this years summit included former commissioner of the Electoral Commission Terry Tselane, Brand SA’s marketing officer Linda Magapatona, City Press editor-in-chief Mondli Makhanya, City of Johannesburg’s policy and planning manager Mbali Motsoeneng and director at KPMG Nosisa Fubu. With a diverse and legendary group of moderators from Tim Modise, Phumlani Majozi and Marlene le Roux, who was also this year’s summit recipient of influencer of influencer award – the highest award of the summit in recognition for the work she has done for persons living with disabilities. The award last year went to Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng and former Public Protector Professor Thuli Madonsela for “their efforts in pushing South Africa against the deeds of those who tried to harm her image”. ‘We need national pride’ Addressing the auditorium Magapatona told attendees how the democratic South Africa was not just a ‘Nelson Mandela’ effort but a collective effort of citizens who were wise enough to allow themselves to be led by Mandela. “The peaceful transition was a result of every South African who was wise enough to listen to the leadership of Mandela. Any leader can stand up and speak but that doesn’t mean people will listen”. “‘Let’s teach our children a sense of national pride. When you are proud about something you say good things about it,” Magapatona said referring to South Africa’s global icons like Caster Semenya, Trevor Noah and Wayde van Niekerk. She also said that South Africans rode the Mandela wave but that we didn’t leverage it enough. The summit also addressed the influence of politics on the South African brand, in an all-male panel moderated by Tim Modise. “We’ve got to ensure that we take our vote seriously. We should blame ourselves for where we are. We voted for corrupt politicians who loot and again have kept them in power, the front man may have been changed but he’s always been in the administration,” Majozi said. Panellists agreed that the idea of the “New Dawn” by the president should not be looked upon naively nor should he be seen as a sole saviour of the country.  The panellists also mentioned the media and citizens as key participants of creating a positive reality of brand South Africa next to the present political climate, and discussed the importance of voter education, not just in election season, but as a continuous effort. “SA defeated [former president Thabo] Mbeki and his Aids policies. SA defeated [former president] Jacob Zuma – the guy never enjoyed one day of his term. The bottom line is we overcame and we are a lot more mature now. We still have to fight, I think the strength of South Africans is our positive attitude,” Mondli Makhanya said, adding that our reality is not as hopeless as it may have been made to seem. “I think we are going to see a lot of flip-flopping throughout [Ramaphosa’s] term,” Terry Tselane said, adding that he was not fully convinced by the “New Dawn” image. ‘Protect the brand always’ The final day of the summit featured youth and community voices, with extensive discussion on the reality of the auditing profession with directors of the controversial accounting firm KPMG giving an address on the state of their work and their efforts towards rebranding. Chairperson of the KPMG board, Wiseman Nkuhlu, said KPMG was ready to be responsible in serving the public interest and had learnt from its mistakes. “There was a time when KPMG was globally the most recognised company. Even in the training of chartered accountants we were seen as the best, but we’ve become less protected. In as much as we benefit from the good brand, when the opposite occurred we really feel it. But we still have to carry the KPMG brand amid the challenges. It’s important to protect the brand. Once its tarnished rebuilding is a long process. You’d think two years is enough but it’s not, you still have to explain yourself and prove yourself. It’s a heavy price”.  ‘4IR must talk about cultural revolution’ A youth-led panel discussed the reality of future leaders and the fourth industrial revolution. Some of the panellists included, Metji Makgoba, Mbali Motsoeneng, Luyolo Sijake, Muziwandile Makhanya and Krigan Naicker. Motsoeneng said the presence of Wi-Fi in the city has given young people access to information which translates to entry to information about the job market. She also said it was not enough to have young people in places of influence, but to ensure that their voices play a critical part in addressing challenges faced by the youth. Metji Makgoba, a doctoral student in England, said that the “fourth industrial revolution needs to talk to cultural revolution. This is important in avoiding new forms of inequality. We need to talk about the cultural issue and changing our education system”. While the panel had an extensive offering of African leaders who brought new and diverse thoughts to the discussion, it was poorly represented where gender was concerned, with the majority of the panels chaired by males. Moeng assured attendees that this would improve in the next summit. “The 2020 Brand Summit South Africa will be held during the first week of June. The host city is yet to be decided upon. From 2020 onwards, apart from incorporating a bigger discussion on the role and place of South Africa in Africa, we shall also organise the event as “Brand Summit South Africa – Africa Brand Summit” week, as that would enable our international guests the time to experience important touristic, shopping, and historic sites in the host city,” Moeng said. The summit ended on a positive note, contributors agreed that the branding of South Africa does not just lie with the president of the country or politicians but rather requires collective efforts of all stakeholders.   