The demolition of illegal structures has left dozens destitute, others hoping to have the rest of the structures razed and has polarised the community Thick tension could be felt in the Alexandra air and the heavy stench of everything from blocked drains to illegally dumped trash along the Jukskei River was not making it any better on Friday afternoon. Residents living in formal and illegally built homes are divided, with the latter asking to be given RDP houses or be allowed to stay in their illegal structures, while the former say they are tired of power outages owing to illegal connections, as well as illegal dumping and increased crime in densely populated areas due to illegal structures. The disputes stem from the recent demolition of about 80 illegal structures by the City of Johannesburg over a week ago. Meanwhile, fears were raised that any more demolitions could lead to violence in the 107-year-old township. A sight of shacks lining the riverbank just a few metres away from the embankment, which at some areas has been stretched into the river to keep these structures away from and higher than the water with mounds of rubbish, continues to be a norm in Alexandra. This is one of the city’s headaches amid concerns raised, given that several shacks were washed away by water when the Jukskei flooded. A week after homes were demolished, and a day after the Alexandra Shutdown Movement decided in a meeting held on Thursday evening to not allow the rebuilding of any more illegal structures in the area, the humidity along Jukskei felt lighter than the tension in the area. The shutdown movement has vowed to bar anyone, including Johannesburg Mayor Herman Mashaba, from rebuilding any of the demolished structures or anyone else from erecting any further illegal structures. Mashaba committed to rebuilding the structures after acknowledging that something was wrong with how the demolition was carried out. “The process of rebuilding will look at creating suitable temporary structures with the view of relocating those affected in the long-term through a structured development plan,” Mashaba’s spokesperson Luyanda Mfeka said. He could not, however, say when and where the structures would be built. City Press was referred to city spokesperson Nthatisi Modingoane, who said all matters were still to be decided on. Meanwhile, one thing that residents living in illegal structures have vowed not to allow is any further demolitions. Several of those staying in the illegal structures crammed in tiny spaces and along the Jukskei said they had no choice but to live there. Residents said they were aware of plans to destroy their homes, but vowed to fight. “It is not going to happen. Who said we enjoy living and raising our children in these conditions?” a woman living in one of the structures asked. “We will fight back whoever wants to demolish the only roofs over our heads.” Lydia Dladla (53) knows no other place to call home than Alexandra, where she was born and bred. When she moved into an RDP house in Extension 8 in early 2000 she hoped for a better life, with some open space for children to play and a cleaner environment with no illegal dumping or blocked sewage system. She said it did not take a year before the first shack was erected in the open spaces, on wetland under pylons, leading to the Jukskei from the last RDP house, and years later the impact of illegal structures was getting heavier by the day. “I used to have a working television set, microwave, fridge and other appliance, but none of those is working today. They are all damaged due to constant power outages owing to illegal connections,” Dladla said. Spokesperson for the shutdown movement Sandile Mavundla has refuted as untrue rumours that they were going to demolish hundreds of shacks and brick houses built illegally across Alexandra. He also denied reports of an imminent shutdown in Alexandra, as well as possible violence. “That is not us. We are yet to decide on a way forward on the existing illegal structures which the City of Johannesburg and its metro police have failed to deal with through by-laws,” he said. “As for another shutdown and violence … we’re not a violent society and it has been seen previously that we do not loot or torch buildings, but rather we protect the little that we have. "What we’re clear about is that, as much as we sympathise with our people, we can’t continue to have illegal structures resulting in illegal power and sewerage connections resulting in continuous sewer blockages and power outages, and won’t allow the building of any further illegal structures.” 