Here are some of the headlines in your City Press today:  Mkhwebane comes guns out blazing A public spat with Thuli Madonsela leads to vehement denials that she’s a “Zupta” deployee, and accusations that the former Public Protector has it out for her. ANCYL fights to live Members of the ANC Youth League (ANCYL) will protest outside the venue of the party’s national executive committee (NEC) meeting in Cape Town on Wednesday to ensure that it implements a recommendation from its national working committee (NWC) that the current league leadership be disbanded. DA to rein in Twitter-happy MPs DA chief whip John Steenhuisen is in the process of writing new caucus rules to rein in MPs who continue to display “ill-discipline” on social media. #FreeEmtee from fast cars Insiders say rapper Emtee has no option but to stay at Ambitiouz Entertainment because he owes millions to the label. R65m laundered through Satawu One of South Africa’s biggest unions was used as a conduit to launder about R65 million in pensions allegedly plundered from impoverished orphans of deceased mine workers. SAA intern sex shocker Sources say tongues are wagging as details of an affair between a boss and an intern have come to light. There is even talk of the marriage failing. Hunt for ATM moles starts ATM president Vuyolwethu Zungula says he is puzzled by the ANC inquiry to investigate claims over the formation of small political parties, such as the ATM, allegedly to weaken the base of the ANC. Zungula accuses the ruling party of being on a witch-hunt as there is no evidence of collusion. Betrayed by the law In its damning report “Corruption in Uniform: When cops become criminals”, Corruption Watch found an array of topics relating to police corruption after engaging with communities throughout the country. And the young suffer and die As winter circumcision starts, parents, traditional leaders and officials are calling for a crackdown on surgeons targeting underage boys. Riding the killer highway Foreign truck drivers say if attacks continue they cannot rule out retaliation on SA drivers in the region. The 2019 Face of June 16 is not political The youth want politicians to listen to them but, because they don’t, most channel their voices through creative expressions. Contraceptive injection doesn’t increase risk of HIV A study says Depo, a popular hormonal contraceptive injection, does not raise the chance of contracting the disease, and activists say women need more birth control choices. Can we talk about my rape? Having consensual sex with a man once doesn’t mean he is entitled to your body whenever he feels like. Bonnie Meslane, a respected PR practitioner, says she was failed by the justice system after opening a case against her alleged rapist. For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press today.