There has been a consistent and coordinated attempt to link the formation of new political party the African Transformation Movement to disgraced ANC leaders regardless of the fact that there has not been a single shred of evidence to substantiate such links, seethed ATM president Vuyolwethu Zungula. “As the ATM we are gatvol about these never-ending links to former president Jacob Zuma and now ANC secretary-general [Ace Magashule]. We are being linked without any evidence to substantiate these ludicrous claims.” “I need to make this clear: the ATM has no involvement whatsoever with either Zuma or Magashule. When we were formed, there was an attempt to call us [the ATM] a Zuma party and now that these attempts have failed, there is an attempt to associate the party to Magashule,” said the furious Zungula. Speaking to City Press on Wednesday afternoon, Zungula in not so many words, suggested that there was an effort — by the media and different factions within the ruling party — of associating disgraced ANC leaders with his party in an attempt at smearing its squeaky-clean image. “This year there has been an onslaught directed towards Magashule, even a book has been published linking him to all sorts of allegations in the Free State province. The attention has shifted, swiftly from associating us [the ATM] with Zuma, to links with the embattled Magashule,” said Zungula.  The former general secretary of the South African Council of Messiani Churches in Christ, which formed ATM, Buyisile Ngqulwana, initially alleged that there were links between ATM, Zuma and now Magashule. Zungula added that it was sinister that Ngqulwana had withdrawn the allegations he made before the Electoral Court but the links still keep gaining traction. A notice of withdrawal, dated June 4 and which has been seen by the City Press, was sent to the respondents, the South African Electoral Commission, and the ATM. The matter did not proceed on Tuesday as scheduled, according to Zungula. This week Ngqulwana, however, informed City Press’ sister publication News24 that he was willing to assist the ANC with its probe into the allegations against the governing party’s secretary-general. He said this following the resolution taken by the governing party’s national working committee that former president Kgalema Motlanthe, party veteran Frene Ginwala and Advocate Fezeka Magano would lead investigations into allegations that Magashule had a hand in the formation of the rival political party. Zungula maintained that there were no links between the party and ANC leaders past and present. He said the links that should be investigated by the party were those of Ngqulwana and President Cyril Ramaphosa. The ATM leader took to social media and posted an image of the two posing for a photo while casting aspersions on Ngqulwana and Ramaphosa’s relationship.   