The exclusion of former ministers from President Ramaphosa’s new Cabinet may have contributed to their resignations. This is according to political analyst, Levy Ndou, who said on Tuesday that although their ages could have been a factor in a climate that is calling for young leaders to step up, their resignations were probably fuelled by personal reasons. “A minister’s payment is higher than that of a member of Parliament,” said Ndou, who added that the exclusion of these ministers from Cabinet may also seem like a demotion. “They agreed to be on the party list because they were eyeing Cabinet positions. When you are removed from your position, it means you are no longer contributing value,” he said. Derek Hanekom became the eighth minister of Parliament to resign from the National Assembly. The office of the chief whip took to Twitter and confirmed this latest resignation on Tuesday. “We confirm that we have received the resignation letter of former minister of tourism comrade Derek Hanekom as an ANC member of Parliament,” read the tweet. His resignation followed that of former Minister of Women in the Presidency Bathabile Dlamini, who also downed tools on Tuesday. He, along with Dlamini, joined six other MPs who were not included in Ramaphosa’s new Cabinet. These are: Jeff Radebe, Nomaindia Mfeketo, Susan Shabangu, Thokozile Xasa, Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba and Siyabonga Cwele. Dlamini received criticism during her period as minister of social development for the alleged mismanagement of the South African State Security Agency. However she says she has never been judged as corrupt. In a letter directed to ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule, Dlamini spoke about how the media had become a tool used to push the agenda of certain leaders at the expense of others. “I am convinced that our country is far from developing or improving because there are those amongst us that have the support of the media, that have mastered the art of demonising us and unfortunately they are seen as very committed, clean and innocent when they have shares in some of those institutions.” Ndou said that although Dlamini’s resignation was a victory for those who did not want her in Parliament, the former minister sounded “forced” in her letter. “She was a president of the women’s league with hopes of being included in the Cabinet. When that didn’t happen, she gave in to public pressure and resigned,” Ndou added. ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe was unavailable for comment because he was graduating, and there was no comment from the office of the chief whip on Hanekom’s resignation. Hanekom, a largely respected former tourism minister, previously indicated he was happy to serve as a legislator and would not resign in order to qualify for ministerial pension benefits. It has been reported that he has made himself available for a position in the Union Buildings after he was requested to do so. The ANC is yet to announce replacements for Dlamini, Hanekom, Cwele and Radebe.