Here are some of the headlines in your City Press News section today: Cyril gears up for war President Cyril Ramaphosa made a last-ditch attempt this week to persuade Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane that he was neither beholden to, nor captured by, the private interests of those who pumped millions of rands into his ANC election campaign. His camp is already anticipating an adverse finding and is discussing a possible court review. State runs out of cash Institutions and municipalities in financial crisis for the past five years have no recovery plans. Mkhwebane acts against two of her alleged detractors Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane says she is tired of insults to her person and the office, and is prepared to take to task anyone crossing the line. Zondo commission “targets blacks” The National Democratic Lawyers Association (Nadel) believes that the state capture commission of inquiry is picking on black people. Zuma lauded by youngsters The former president was praised for being “forward thinking” and for “his role in heeding the youth’s call and facilitating fee-free higher education, even in its imperfect state”. Former ministers’ travel privileges cost us R32m Over the past five years, Parliament has spent just more than R32 million on travel privileges for former ministers, deputy ministers and their spouses. One man’s journey to quench a village’s thirst After getting tired of seeing members of his community get up at the crack of dawn every day to queue for hours to draw water from natural springs, 58-year-old builder Phineas Mapfumo Madaela decided to do something to change the dreary situation. Our kids need to know about proper nutrition A nutritionist has questioned the current curriculum on nutrition in schools saying it is irrelevant and contains inaccurate information on education on nutrition. Minnie - Don’t let the world crush your dreams After keeping her business under wraps for five years, Minnie Dlamini has surprised fans with a skincare range. Gents, don’t buy that fake ‘viagra’ online An erection is not worth dying for – but you may well die if you use counterfeit and illegal performance enhancers – experts warn.