James Selfe to bring political to governance unit ahead of 2021 poll. Following its dismal performance in last month’s elections, the DA has already put processes in place to ensure a better showing next time, particularly in the municipal polls in 2021. The task of clawing itself out of the quicksand has been placed in the hands of party veteran and outgoing federal executive chairperson James Selfe, who had held the position for almost 20 years. Speaking to City Press about his redeployment, Selfe said the governance unit was not a new feature, but had been in existence for a while. It was established by professionals within the party, he added. He said he would bring “political clout” to the unit. “Members of the governance unit have been tasked with supporting DA administrations, not only by ensuring better service delivery, but also by reaffirming to South Africans who may have become disillusioned by the party that, where it governs, it does better than any other political organisation,” said Selfe. “I will be interacting with the mayors and premier, and I will be making sure that government operates in terms of the mandate those in positions of power got from the organisation.” Selfe added that the party had last month “discovered that one of the key things that distinguishes the DA from other parties is that we run corruption-free and efficient governments”. “Therefore, it is actually cardinal that where we govern, we continue to govern better. Nothing is more important than that.” Selfe said South Africans had been led to believe that there would be a so-called new dawn under President Cyril Ramaphosa’s administration, whereby politicians who had been accused of corruption would be removed from office. However, he said, it was becoming evident that the ANC was recycling the same individuals, which would lead to an exodus of support from the governing party. He said it was a given that support would automatically come to the DA. “The governance unit will have to ensure that it delivers an efficient and a cost-effective government; that it communicates its achievements and failings; and that it remains as transparent as possible.” DA chief whip John Steenhuisen told City Press that the DA’s turnaround strategy would be taken on by the collective. “One of the things that we learnt from these elections was that voters were switched off by the infighting and ill-discipline of those on the DA benches, as well as by internal squabbling among our party members. “There is a duty now on chief whips of all caucuses across all levels to instil a form of discipline that is going to ensure that the message that goes out from all caucuses speaks to who we are and what we are about, rather than internally focused issues.” Steenhuisen added that there was an undertaking by DA leader Mmusi Maimane “to ensure that all party members understand that ill-discipline is no longer going to be tolerated”. But the question remains: Who will take over as the party’s federal executive chairperson? Selfe’s move to the DA’s governance unit opens up a vacancy in a crucial post in the party – comparable to the secretary-general position in the ANC. With these bold leadership changes afoot in the DA – changes that have seen former leader Helen Zille being sidelined – it is expected that there will be a fair amount of jostling for the vacant position. Steenhuisen has already put up his hand to fill the pivotal post. Confirming to City Press that he was “considering the role”, he said: “I have been approached to stand and I am taking counsel. I have no doubt that there will be an announcement in the next few weeks. “It is a big responsibility. I have a lot of energy and enthusiasm to bring to the position. I buy completely into Mmusi’s vision and have been very supportive of him in Parliament. I think I have a lot to offer, but I will consult. “I have been dealing with equally serious matters in Parliament and have enjoyed doing what I do here, but I think the party needs some firm direction to ensure that we go into 2021 prepared, and very clear about who we are and what we are about as an organisation,” said Steenhuisen. National chairperson Athol Trollip is another name that has been touted as a possible contender to replace Selfe. As for Selfe, he is looking forward to “ploughing back” the time he missed spending with his family while on the job. “My youngest daughter was nine years old when I took over as chairperson. She is now 28 and lives overseas, so I do plan to spend more time with my family. I have a young grandson now and my other daughter is getting married at the end of the year.” TALK TO US Do you agree with the DA claim that it ‘governs better’? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword DA and tell us what you think. Include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material