Tiger Brands’ top human resources (HR) boss, Sinenhlanhla Magagula, has come under fire for allegedly “copying and pasting” HR intellectual property from Sasol, where she used to work. Magagula worked for Sasol for 10 years, up until April 2018, according to her LinkedIn profile. She joined Tiger Brands the following month. City Press has a copy of an email that was sent to the following Sasol executives: joint CEOs Bongani Nqwababa and Stephen Cornell; chief financial officer Paul Victor; executive vice-president: HR and corporate affairs Charlotte Mokoena; executive vice-president: energy business and sustainability Maurice Radebe; and senior vice-president: strategy and continuous improvement Marius Brand. Also included in the mail is Tiger Brands CEO Lawrence MacDougall. The email specifically states that Magagula, who joined Tiger Brands as chief HR officer, had used Sasol’s HR intellectual property at Tiger Brands. It also says she brought in seven HR professionals, six of whom “were previously all employed at Sasol directly before joining Tiger Brands”. “They have brought with them all of Sasol’s HR intellectual property, from frameworks to toolkits and supplier relationships previously developed at Sasol. Copy-and-paste experts “They have brought all of this on their personal hard drives and have eagerly distributed these documents among the HR fraternity with a ‘do as I say’ attitude – transforming the current HR team into copy-and-paste experts, rendering all of the innovative and strategic thinking null and void.” Tiger Brands spokesperson Nevashnee Naicker and her counterpart at Sasol, Matebello Motloung, confirmed that their respective companies had received the email about Magagula, and that it was sent to various Sasol top executives as well as MacDougall. Naicker said: “Tiger Brands acknowledges receipt of an email that was sent to our CEO and the leadership of Sasol regarding this matter. Tiger Brands’ CEO, executive committee and board take any allegations of misconduct very seriously. “The leadership is extremely concerned by the allegations made in this letter and we assure you that the matter is being given serious attention,” said Naicker. Read: Listeriosis crisis has cost Tiger Brands R1.4bn in revenue so far Investigated “The CEO has asked that this matter be investigated internally to determine the factual basis of these claims,” added Naicker. “As a company, Tiger Brands is committed to ethical business practices and to conducting ourselves in a way that is fitting for a leading corporate citizen.” Motloung responded by saying: “Sasol acknowledges receipt of the email. We are currently assessing the allegation and will consider our options.” When contacted by City Press, Magagula’s response was as follows: “I cannot comment on an ongoing investigation until this has been concluded.”  On Tiger Brands’ website, the group describes Magagula as “a well-rounded and highly experienced HR and business leader with a proven track record”. Under her leadership, the letter alleges, the Tiger Brands HR team simply regurgitated Sasol’s business models and policy frameworks. It says: “These were not properly refined due to pressure and tight deadlines to deliver coming from the HR head. “And, because of having done a lot of work post the production of the booklets and materials, these will now have to be redone because the frameworks and models have changed in less than six months. “Very little consideration is being given, or has taken into account the current maturity level of the organisation and whether the business can absorb the constant bombardment of new initiatives from all HR streams; culture; leadership development; diversity and inclusion transformation; talent management and reward.” The email also says that Sasol presentations and booklets were “duplicated to fit into the Tiger Brands landscape”.    