Five Democratic Alliance councillors in the City of Tshwane could be recalled if the party’s federal legal commission finds that the public representative councillors were irregularly nominated to occupy five vacant posts in the city council. This was confirmed by DA provincial leader John Moodey, who said he had made a submission on Tuesday last week to the federal legal commission to verify if their nomination was valid. Moodey took the decision to do so after some regional members had appealed against their nominations, basing their argument on the fact that their interviews were not recorded as required by the party’s rules. However, Moodey said all interviews for councillors, who were nominated on May 20, were not recorded by the selection panel. Their appeals were rejected because there was no proof that any of the interviewees were prejudiced for not having interviews recorded. A total of 50 public representative councillors were interviewed in December last year and a list was compiled. However, the regional executive committee resolved to review the list after five vacancies emerged in the city council. DA Tshwane north regional chairperson Abel Tau said they were waiting for the federal legal commission ruling. It was not clear when such a ruling would be made. Tau said they submitted the names of the five councillors to the Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) because they could not wait for the ruling due to not having enough time. He said the city was scheduled to have a budget vote on Thursday last week and they wanted to have all their councillors there. The DA has 93 councillors in council. Tau revealed that one of the five, Balti Ngobeni, had withdrawn from the list. He had been replaced by Cindy Motale, Tau said. Ngobeni withdrew, saying that he would rather focus on his employment in the city’s utility services unit. The four other councillors were Bronwyn Engelbrecht, Sylvester Tennyson Theophilus Phokoje, Phuti Kwanaite and Malcolm Ian de Klerk. Tau said it was within the rules to review the list of councillors but he denied claims that the region was not consulted before the names of five councillors were submitted to the IEC and the city.    