Here are some of the headlines in your City Press News section today: Hit man claims SABC boss was targeted “We are not after your car.” That is what an alleged hitman told SABC audit executive Thami Zikode after his intended victim foiled what is now believed to have been a hit on his life. The shooter said a mystery ‘lady’ sent him and others. ANC speaks with forked tongues SACP deputy general secretary Solly Mapaila owned up to being the source of the economic term – quantitative easing – that exposed the ANC as a house divided this week. The rand went into a tailspin shortly after ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule said the party’s lekgotla had resolved to set up a task team to look into quantitative easing as a means of arresting rampant unemployment and poverty. Outcry over SABC sex report Men accused of sexual harassment, women who say they were victims, unions and even whistle-blowers have all complained bitterly about the SABC’s commission of inquiry into sexual harassment. If I failed, then only God can remove me Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane has stuck to her guns amid robust criticism of her work, vowing that she will not relinquish the reins at the Chapter 9 institution. How Zondo implicated Zuma Despite repeatedly saying he has not been implicated, we prove the former president wrong. Maimane blames ill-discipline for polls failure After getting a beating in the May polls, the DA needs to rethink what it wants to be and the only way is to adapt or die. Lebeya has local looters in sight The net is closing in on more politicians and officials in municipalities across the country as the Hawks intensify their investigations into graft and maladministration, according to Hawks head Lieutenant General Godfrey Lebeya. How to tackle school violence Two summits have been convened so far this year, with stakeholders offering various suggestions on ways to tackle the scourge. Give us six months We will eradicate this bucket system. Come to us in six months and ask us about the bucket system, says new Human Settlements and Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu. The future of transport is here With close to 15 000 lives lost every year on South Africa’s roads at a cost of R140 billion, the future of transport – both public and private – cannot arrive fast enough. And that future is driverless vehicles. Jobs that cities create They didn’t know how many people worked in their Expanded Public Works Programme and failed to compile a register with their names and identity numbers. That’s what the City of Tshwane is alleged to have done in the past financial year. Bleak tour for the future World Environment Day was this week, so it is a good time to reflect on how the climate crisis could affect our tourism industry – and what it will mean for you. I’m happy and content Almost two years since Metro FM newsreader Melanie Bala and kwaito maestro Zwai Bala publicly confirmed their separation, the radio personality has put the past behind her. Rey already plotting her future A day after winning the biggest award of her life – Record of the Year – Holly Rey was already plotting her future. For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press today.