ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule has lashed out at the media for portraying the ANC as a house divided. Magashule told journalists, during the announcement of the ANC’s nominees for parliamentary committee chairpersons on Wednesday, that it was not true that he was at odds with ANC president Cyril Ramaphosa. “As the ANC officials we are very happy that we have been working very consistently. We just read in the media that the [secretary-general] is going this way and the president is going this way. It is not true at all. I don’t know when are you going to accept it? even when you hear it from the horse’s mouth you still believe there is something else happening,” Magashule said. “There is no way the officials of the ANC would ever not work as a collective because that is our understanding of how this liberation movement works. We operate as a collective. The leader of the ANC is president of the ANC. We complement one another because we are a team and have actually taken conference resolutions and there is one resolution which says we must unite and renew the ANC.” The secretary-general also refuted reports that the announcement of the chairperson nominees had been delayed because of interference on his part. “We just want to make it clear that there was no confusion last week, there was no [secretary-general’s] list. The only thing was that we needed to engage with the alliance.” Magashule appeared alongside newly appointed ANC chief whip Pemmy Majodina, who threw her weight behind chairperson nominees who were alleged to have been implicated in a series of wrongdoings. The list included Faith Muthambi, Supra Mahumapelo, Mosebenzi Zwane and Bongani Bongo – who previously served in former president Jacob Zuma’s Cabinet. Muthambi will serve as chairperson of cooperative governance and traditional affairs, Mahumapelo for tourism, Zwane for transport and Bongo for home affairs. Majodina said that all nominees had passed the test of the integrity commission and none had been found guilty by any court of law. “We believe in the presumption of innocent until proven guilty. On the ANC side they have been subjected to the integrity commission, all of them, and I think I must also point out specifically, with regards to comrade Bongo, comrade Bongo appeared before the ethics committee. Since 2017 that case has been dragging. He approached the courts asking the courts to intervene because he wanted this matter to be put to rest,” Majodina said. Bongo had been accused by Advocate Ntuthuzelo Vanara – who was evidence leader in Parliament’s state capture of state owned enterprises inquiry – of attempting to bribe him and derail the work of the committee. “Unfortunately this morning he received a response from the court saying that it cannot instruct Parliament to complete the matter and he must go back to Parliament and it must release the findings of the ethics committee. The next step then is for him to meet with the speaker of Parliament and request the speaker to release the findings and take it from there.” Bosasa-implicated Cedric Frolick has also made a return as the nominee for the position of chair of chairs which he served in during the fifth Parliament. Nomvula Mokonyane was previously announced for the position but later withdrew citing personal reasons. Read the full list of nominees below: Signed ANC Committee Nominee List.pdf by CityPress on Scribd   