Midvaal mayor Bongani Baloyi says the DA is investigating whether the municipal manager, Albert de Klerk, was in anyway involved in a jobs-for-sale saga. The municipality is investigating the irregular appointment of people to positions without having the necessary qualifications. “It is common cause that in the appointment process in the municipality, the last person to finalise any appointment is the accounting officer, which is the municipal manager. So, we have started a process of finding out what his role is in those appointments,” Baloyi said during a press briefing on Wednesday morning. De Klerk has been placed on special leave for the duration of the investigation to ensure that there is no interference with the case. Baloyi mentioned that there were two other irregular appointments which have come to light. He, however, did not name those involved. He said that there were signs of some sort of “systemic manipulation of the process” regarding these appointments. In March it was reported that deputy municipal manager Thom Peeters, Midvaal Municipality Corporate Service MMC Amelia Tshukudu and other officials were implicated in irregular appointments. Peeters was placed on special leave following the allegations against him and now Baloyi has confirmed that he was found guilty for his role in the appointments. Tshukudu was also suspended for her role in the matter. Baloyi first caught wind of the matter after a whistleblower contacted him. He referred the matter to the council, which led to the investigation. “That investigation came back within 30 days from council and it advised that this is a serious offence and there is now prima facie evidence of the irregular appointment of people who do not meet the qualifications for the positions,” Baloyi said. The ANC in Sedibeng has approached Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane to probe cash-for-jobs allegations. The mayor said the party was waiting for the disciplinary committee to give them a sanction regarding Peeters.