Here are some of the headlines in your City Press newspaper this week: Inside the SABC’s soccer drama: Mass axings, boardroom battles and sports rights victory marked another turbulent week as the broke public broadcaster tries to turn the corner. Fugitive bishop name dropped Ramaphosa for cash: Controversial fugitive Mpumalanga bishop Hangwi Maumela has been caught on tape bragging about his closeness to President Cyril Ramaphosa and then allegedly conning a desperate Emalahleni businessman out of R100 000. Bongo says rumours of his death would have killed him: Former state security minister Bongani Bongo says rumours of his alleged death would have killed him if he had heard them while in hospital. He has been in hospital for several weeks due to suspected poisoning. Odwa Shweni film shocker: The actor’s family has threatened to interdict the film makers, who are completing the film that led to his tragic death. Women revolt after Silwerskerm faux pas: Award-winning film director Jenna Bass boycotted the Silwerskerm film festival screening this week as she felt that a naked image being used as a marketing campaign at the innovative festival was challenging her personally as a woman. IFP leader Buthelezi’s swangsong: With his handpicked successor installed, the long-serving leader’s advice to new leadership was for them to protect women and children. ANC Gauteng not moving on gender battle: The ANC in Gauteng has dug in its heels, so far refusing to chop one male MEC to make way for a female one, as instructed by the party’s national executive committee. Emails show De Lille’s party not doing too GOOD: Patricia de Lille is on a mission to clean up her ailing party’s national leadership committee. The party is swimming in debt. Rite of passage nightmare: Parents are up in arms after their sons’ circumcisions were botched at the surgery of a medical doctor contracted to perform the procedures. Raped by her uncle: A senior government official and choir manager at a prominent church in Gauteng appeared this week in the Pretoria Magistrates’ Court charged with raping his niece. ANC playing dirty to keep 15 wards: The governing party is accused of buying votes by handing out food parcels and cash to residents of QwaQwa ahead of the by-elections on Wednesday. Leo and Brad together for the first time: City Press secured an exclusive interview with DiCaprio, during which he talks about Pitt and himself working on the same movie for the very first time in their careers.