Just over two years ago, Howard Nkosi (43) went in for what he thought would be surgery to ease the pain in his bladder. Working as a mechanic at the time, Nkosi would suffer from sharp pains after a day’s exertion – a problem that, until March 2017, he had managed himself by taking pain killers. Fast-forward to two years later, and Nkosi now accuses Witbank Provincial Hospital in Mpumalanga of robbing him of his ability to lead a functional life after being admitted for a surgical procedure. He says he can no longer walk, carry out his professional work, lift heavy objects, pass urine without feeling pain or have sex, claiming that doctors botched his surgery – and, in so doing, have effectively stripped him of his dignity as a man. Nkosi, who lives in Msholozi, a township in KwaMhlanga – has accused the hospital and the doctors who performed his surgery of botching the operation and of medical negligence. He now lives off a government disability grant, saying the surgery caused more complications and pain than he had suffered beforehand. He was referred to the Witbank hospital from KwaMhlanga Community Hospital, after being told he needed specialist care. “I was not told what surgery they would perform on me, only that it would help my bladder problem,” he told City Press this week. “But my troubles started from the moment I was wheeled into the surgical ward. I could see that the surgical equipment and the theatre itself were not clean. They cut into my stomach and, to my surprise, after the operation I was told that my gall bladder was removed. But I hadn’t consented to this.” After the operation, Nkosi said he started feeling pain whenever he tried to pass urine and also suffered from abdominal pains. A year later, Nkosi sought help. He was scared to go back to Witbank hospital after the trauma he had allegedly suffered there, and consulted with a doctor in private practice instead. City Press has seen a copy of an affidavit the doctor signed to help Nkosi access a disability grant last year. He had diagnosed Nkosi as having intra-abdominal haemorrhage as well as recurrent adhesions, claiming they were complications arising from his operation. City Press tried to contact the doctor, but no response was forthcoming by the time of going to press. However, the medical assessment form submitted to the SA Social Security Agency was signed, stamped and dated by the practitioner. City Press also has a document from Tweefontein Community Health Centre, where Nkosi also sought medical help. It is stamped and signed, confirming his complaints of lower abdominal pain, a painful erection and “abnormal movement in the stomach” following his surgery. The document was meant to be taken as his referral to a district-level hospital. Nkosi was told by doctors at KwaMhlanga that he would need to undergo further surgery to repair the complications. But he will not hear of it if it means going back to Witbank Provincial Hospital. The Mpumalanga department of health had not offered comment by the time of going to print.