The ANC in Gauteng has dug in its heels, so far refusing to chop one male MEC to make way for a female one, as instructed by the party’s national executive committee (NEC). Three weeks ago the NEC reversed an understanding that Gauteng Premier David Makhura had with the party’s top officials to have a 50-50 gender representation in his executive, instead of the 60-40 required when the premier is male. But still Makhura has not acted on the decision, allegedly because he is reluctant to dismiss anyone in his cabinet. The premier is said to be trying to convince party leadership that he has a formidable team and dismissing an MEC would not be a wise decision. “What is happening is that he is fighting to keep his cabinet as it is. He is hoping to find a loophole so that he doesn’t have to fire anyone,” according to a source. A provincial executive committee (PEC) member told City Press that “disrupting the balance” was not advisable at this point because it might pose a threat to the party in the legislature because it had won the majority by a very slim margin. “He [Makhura] went to national to say we have tried very hard to balance youth, gender and alliance in forming a provincial executive. And remember we have a majority of only one vote in the legislature,” said the source. The PEC member believes Makhura has a “strong case” and that is why he is reverting to the NEC to affirm his position. The ANC’s Gauteng secretary, Jacob Khawe, has confirmed that a meeting will be held with national leadership, alliance partners and the leadership of the women’s league. “We think that these meetings will allow us to make space to present our view. What we are discussing is, if our argument does not hold water with the national leadership, in coming back we must ask ourselves which name represents a particular imperative we can do without,” he said in a video posted on the party’s Gauteng Facebook page. Khawe defended Makhura’s selection process, saying he respected gender parity rules as stated in the ANC’s constitution. “We were convinced that we had done so much to demonstrate to anybody our commitment to gender parity. We have strong good women in the province.” The party’s constitution states: “The ANC shall implement a programme of affirmative action, including the provision of a quota of not less than 50% of women …” Khawe cleared rumours about the supposed deadline to which Makhura had to abide before making the announcement. Last week NEC member Dakota Legoete told the media the premier had had to make the decision public this past Monday. “However, we would also like to put it to you on the record that we did not receive a formal communication on a deadline. It is not out of disrespect. We would not disrespect the instruction of the national leadership,” Khawe said. There has been speculation that either health MEC Bandile Masuku or transport and infrastructure MEC Jacob Mamabolo could face the axe. However, Masuku’s efforts to turn around the health sector in Gauteng have been highly praised by Makhura, said the source. “Masuku is doing very well and there is no reason for him to be replaced.” Replacing Mamabolo could prove to be tricky as well because Makhura has both a strong working and personal relationship him. “They have come through the ranks together; when Makhura was elected SA Students’ Congress leader, Mamabolo was elected the next year,” the source said. Makhura had been allowed to deviate from the formula after asking for permission from the top leadership. This was reversed after the ANC Women’s League raised its unhappiness at the NEC meeting. The PEC is meeting this weekend and it is expected to take a final decision on the matter. Party deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte confirmed at a press conference last month that in a discussion about provincial leadership the NEC had decided the Gauteng government needed to have a 60-40 gender representation. The province is led by Makhura with 10 MECs, five of whom are women instead of the required six. TALK TO US Will Gauteng premier be allowed to keep his cabinet 50-50 instead of the required 60-40? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword PREMIER and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material