CEO of the SA Forum of Civil Engineering Contractors, Webster Mfebe believes, the maladministration in South Africa’s state-owned enterprises (SOEs) should be blamed on three factors –juniorisation, mediocritisation and state capture. Speaking during the special provincial funeral of businesswoman and uMkhonto weSizwe veteran Dr Thandi Ndlovu on Friday, Mfebe urged President Cyril Ramaphosa to address these issues. He said he would be writing a book focusing on how to correct the current state of the country’s ailing SOEs. “Dr T hated corruption, malfeasance and state capture with all her heart and we agreed that the private sector is a major source of all this and the dysfunctional state-owned enterprises … ” Mfebe told mourners that Ndlovu had already agreed “to write a foreword, proofread and contribute some chapters in the book I am writing titled Juniorisation, Mediocritisation and Capture of State Institutions in South Africa”. Read: Businesswoman Dr Thandi Ndlovu killed in car crash He also called on government to ensure that all South Africans benefit from the controversial National Health Insurance Bill, which was unveiled by Health Minister Zweli Mkhize earlier this month. “I sincerely hope that the much-vaunted NHI will remedy these inequalities, preceded by the development of healthcare infrastructure, routine maintenance, adequate staffing and availability of the requisite medical supplies and equipment,” he told the mourners at the House of Treasures Ministries Church, south of Johannesburg. Mfebe applauded Ramaphosa’s “new dawn” saying that it offers hope for the country to deal with the burning issues. He acknowledged the president for supporting Public Private Growth Initiative which arose out of the job and investment summits. Four of the 43 private sector projects, which are set to get underway this year, could see an economic injection of R840 billion and the creation of 155 000 jobs over the next five years. These projects include the expansion of a Beefmaster abattoir and deboning facility, the establishment of local vehicle parts manufacturers, specific forestry plantations and paper processing plants and the founding of an agricultural development agency. “This is a private initiative, which dispels the wrong notion that the private sector is on an investment strike,” he said. Ndlovu, who died in a car crash in Rustenburg last weekend, was given a hero’s send off on Friday, with Mfebe highlighting the impact she had in many people’s lives. Her long list of achievements included establishing Motheo Construction, one of South Africa’s first black female-owned construction companies and the country’s leading provider of social housing. Mfebe described Ndlovu as a “philanthropist, spiritual being, gallant fighter for socio-economic justice, community and nation builder, and most importantly a woman of prodigious stature and character … ”  