Did a government department really take a photo of former president Nelson Mandela, remove the name of the photographer and send it out to hundreds of government email addresses, telling them they could have free use of the photo to mark the great statesman’s death, resulting in at least 5.8 million unlawful reproductions as the image went viral on the internet? That’s the case being made by photographer Shaun Earl Harris and his agents, PictureNet Africa, in one of the first matters to be heard in the new Gauteng commercial court. It is also one of the largest copyright infringement claims involving an artwork in South African history. The new court – with branches in Johannesburg and Pretoria – was announced in October by Dunstan Mlambo, the judge president of the Gauteng division of the high court. It aims to achieve speedier and more effective judgments in commercial matters because of case management being handled directly by the judges who will hear the cases. The judges deal with the case’s timetable and pretrial meetings, witness statements and the exchange of documents. The case, with potential damages ranging from the tens of millions to the tens of billions of rands, is scheduled for October 7 to 11 in Pretoria and looks set to leave the Government Communication Information System (GCIS) red-faced if the claims against the state are found to be true. They are accused of deliberately removing the metadata from the photograph six months before Mandela’s death and then issuing purchase orders to print more than 250 000 undisclosed copies before sending it out worldwide for widespread use. According to about 2 500 pages of documents submitted to the court so far, which City Press has seen, the image of a smiling Mandela was chosen by GCIS and the Mandela family as the perfect photo to be used for his funeral. The state licensed the photo from Harris and PictureNet first in 2006 for a single use in a book, and then separately for limited use at Mandela’s funeral on banners and memorial programmes, for which it paid R25 000. But the court papers include a purchase order to print large numbers of the image before a copy of an email containing the photograph, which was sent at 3.11am on the morning of December 6 2013, to more than 340 government email addresses by GCIS’s deputy director of electronic information resources. It shares details of a website for dedications and news on funeral arrangements and where the image could be found and concludes: “I attach a photo you can use.” The photo is Harris’ and contains no credits. It is still up at the government’s Mandela memorial site. The state has argued about procedural matters and flatly denied the claims against it, but neither the communications minister nor the GCIS (the two defendants in the case) were willing to comment this week. “The matter is before court and we are therefore unable to deal with this matter at this level,” is all that GCIS’s Phumla Williams would say. The court papers offer an astonishing forensic breakdown of millions of uses of Harris’ image, taken at the presidential residence Mahlamba Ndlopfu in Pretoria in 1999. It was used in adverts, banners, pamphlets, government magazines and brochures, across electronic and print media globally, across social media pages, on billboards and 20 different T-shirt designs, and even as the main image on an app and as a postal stamp in Papua New Guinea. At first, Harris gathered evidence of the infringements because, he says, his agency did not initially believe him. Later, the agency did its own forensic search. The image was, say the court papers, first put on the internet by GCIS, wiping out any copyright claims Harris and PictureNet might have, with damages ranging from almost R1 billion to a potential R47 billion calculated in the value of the infringement of the SA Copyright Act and ranging across the 50 years after Harris’ death that copyright would apply. Harris tried for years to be heard on the matter and tried to settle out of court, but the state would not listen. This week, the British Jamaican South African citizen said: “This case will show that however long it takes, photographers and creatives should stand firm in defending our copyrights, empower ourselves, manage and protect our artwork in this physical-digital world, to enjoy the benefits of our skills.” Over the years he has become an activist on copyright for artists and freelancers. His lawyer, Andrew Boerner, expressed dissatisfaction with GCIS and the minister, saying that they are continually “failing to comply with the directive of the court which set out the dates by which the parties were to comply with various procedural steps ... Just recently, the defendants failed to provide copies of specific documents that we requested. This has forced us to file yet another application to compel them. The defendants are dragging their heels but we will do whatever it takes to drag them to court in October.” PictureNet’s attorney, Thokozani Mthembu, describes the use of Harris’ photo as a “deliberate and callous infringement ... The Copyright Act allows the court to grant additional damages against an infringing party where the court finds the infringement to have been flagrant and for benefit to the infringing party.” Harris told City Press that he took the photograph after arriving early at the Mahlamba Ndlopfu presidential residence for a meeting between Mandela and then UK prime minister Tony Blair. “I walked up to the residence and the president was standing outside. He greeted me and I asked if I could take a photograph. He said I could. He took two steps to the left and gave a big smile, directly at the camera.” 