Pitso Mosimane has revealed the reason why he is not interested in the vacant Bafana Bafana coaching job. The Mamelodi Sundowns coach said he was still haunted by the events of June 2012 when he was sacked from the national team just two years into his four-year contract with Safa. “It was sad to be fired by a taxi owner, a priest and a traditional chief. So do I want to face that again? My fate and career in the hands of those people,” Mosimane told the media on Thursday during a question and answer session to preview his team’s MTN8 semifinal clash against SuperSport United on Sunday. Mosimane was referring to then technical committee chairperson Fanyana Sibanyoni, former chief executive Robin Peterson and erstwhile Safa vice-president Chief Mwelo Nonkonyana who were all part of the decision-makers at the time. Mosimane was fired shortly after Bafana drew 1-1 against Egypt in their opening 2014 World Cup qualifiers in Rustenburg. Although he praised Safa for the “wonderful opportunity” while in charge between August 2010 and June 2012, Mosimane could not hide his sadness at the way he was fired despite guiding them to six wins, seven draws and three losses. “I don’t believe a coach who plays two years and loses two games should be fired. So do I want to face that again? I don’t want to be in that situation because it is still the same. I don’t want to be there. I am happy at Sundowns. “I learned a lot and the African adventure that I got is through Safa and they have been good to me. What was not nice is the way it happened when they sacked me. “I even begged them when they fired me. I said don’t fire me I have a lot to offer. I know what I am doing, it will come up right. “I said I defeated Egypt – I went to Military Stadium [in Cairo] against the mighty Egypt [with the likes of Hassan] Shehata, [Mohamed] Aboutrika, Wael Gomaa ... I can go on and on – they don’t know those names. It’s sad. Did they understand? They don’t understand. “What do they do from Monday to Friday to decide on a football matter? They don’t have the ability. It’s unbelievable. “And because we were drawing and drawing, those people are the ones responsible to hire and fire.” Mosimane reiterated that a chance must be given to “those who have never been there” – a local coach in particular. “I am saying a local coach because we don’t have enough time and we are starting the World Cup qualifiers very soon. Benni [McCarthy] should have a chance, Gavin Hunt, Steve Komphela. Molefi can do it also. “So why should I envy [the Bafana coaching job]? I don’t want my fate to be in those people’s hands again. Never in my life,” said Mosimane. “At Sundowns, my fate is on the pitch. My results keep me. I am not at Sundowns because the board loves me. No, it’s because we win games.” 