With his handpicked successor installed, the long-serving leader’s advice to new leadership was for them to protect women and children Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) leader Mangosuthu Buthelezi handed over the baton yesterday, to secretary-general Velenkosini Hlabisa, as had been anticipated. While Buthelezi reiterated that his party was not a one-man show, and would continue on its upward trajectory without him, his ghost will continue to linger in many ways in the IFP. Besides handpicking Hlabisa, Buthelezi will also continue to spearhead his party’s resurgence as its member of Parliament. The IFP became the fourth largest party in Parliament after the May 8 elections, growing its support to 3.38% and landing itself 14 seats in the National Assembly. It also dislodged the DA as the official opposition in its stronghold of KwaZulu-Natal, where it received 14.58% of the votes – six seats in the provincial legislature. It was also clear during the proceedings yesterday that Buthelezi’s supporters were not ready to let go of the elder statesman. The delegates who filled the Mangosuthu Buthelezi Regional Stadium in uLundi went against the grain of what is the norm in other party elective conferences. Where other party supporters wear regalia with faces of their preferred candidates, at this IFP conference they wore clothing only bearing the face of Buthelezi. This could have been because all the top party positions were uncontested. IFP national spokesperson Mkhuleko Hlengwa confirmed that “since they have not been challenged, Nkosi Mzamo Buthelezi will be deputy president, Blessed Gwala retains his position as national chair, with Thembeni Mthethwa as his deputy. “Secretary general of the party will be Siphosethu Ngcobo, with his deputy being Mangaqa Albert Mncwango”. He also confirmed that Narend Singh would remain the party’s treasurer-general as he was also unopposed. In his last address as party leader, Buthelezi said he understood “why it feels like such a big moment”. “The story of the IFP is deeply intertwined with my own story; the story of Buthelezi. “I have served this party for 44 years since its founding in 1975 yet I have never served alone. This party is bigger than Buthelezi and has a future beyond my own.” He, however, said he was willing to serve under Hlabisa “in whatever capacity the party saw fitting”. Buthelezi also offered advice to the incoming leadership, urging them to “reignite grassroots activism and protect women and children”. “We live in a society that gives me sleepless nights, where women and children face violence. As my last warning, I caution that the party become the champion of the vulnerable, in particular women and children,” said Buthelezi. He also reiterated his confidence in the party going forward, saying it was “evident when we listen to the IFP Youth Brigade, to the IFP’s Women’s Brigade and to all the leaders of our structures across South Africa”. “There is a vision that leads us all, an overarching call that defines the identity of the IFP,” the outgoing leader said. Former chairperson Ziba Jiyane, who had indicated that he would challenge Hlabisa for the top job, was barred from taking part in the proceedings. Hlengwa said: “Jiyane has been running to the media saying he wished to bring democracy back to the IFP. Democracy means adherence to party policies and our policies also indicate that a member ought to have been in the party for more than a year before they take part in the elections. “This has not been the case with Jiyane and he has a habit of hopping from one party to the next and this has also left us questioning his loyalty to the party,” he said.