ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule has implored community members in Phuthaditjaba in the Free State to vote for the ruling party in Wednesday’s by-elections. This is despite the fact that it was because of the ruling party expelling 16 of its councillors and vacancies being declared in their respective wards that the by-elections were happening. Fifteen of the expelled councillors will be contesting as independent candidates. At a mass gathering held in the area on Tuesday evening, Magashule said the governing party was the only organisation that could solve the service delivery issues which they are facing. Lack of water and housing, poor eduction and unemployment were some of the priorities that Magashule addressed. “People are complaining about problems that the ANC can solve. I promise you, in the name of the ANC and President Cyril Ramaphosa, that we will work hard to change the situation in Qwaqwa,” Magashule said. The ANC bigwig was speaking to the community ahead of the hotly contested Maluti-a-Phofung elections, which are due to take place on Wednesday.  He said that he believed that the ANC was failing in ensuring the well-being of the community despite the support they continue to show the party. “I spoke to President Cyril Ramaphosa and I told him that the people of Qwaqwa love the ANC but we continue to let them down. When you look at the support we are getting from the Free State, 90% of it is from Qwaqwa residents,” he said to a small group of residents. RT @queenin_m: Magashule says the ANC has failed the people of Qwaqwa but it is time for change. pic.twitter.com/wbNH9TFreE  Magashule was accompanied by the ANC Free State treasure and premier of the province, Sisi Ntombela who also urged residents to vote for the governing party. The ANC has been working tirelessly to attract voters. They will be competing with the 15 councillors who were expelled from the party in December last year. The group was accused of voting with opposition parties when electing a mayor after Vusi Tshabalala was recalled. Other political parties which are contesting include the ATM, DA, EFF, African Content Movement (ACM) and Heavenly Economic and Political Freedom Programme (HEPFP). The municipality is known for both its financial and political woes. The cash-strapped municipality has been without a mayor for more than six months and has struggled financially because of maladministration.   City Press is an agenda-setting South African news brand that publishes across platforms. Its flagship print edition is distributed on a Sunday. 