SAA literally had to put out the flames this week when a world-renowned singer claimed on social media that a fire broke out while she and her fellow passengers were on an SAA flight travelling to Washington, DC, in the US. But, in fact, it was only a small problem with the air conditioner, City Press’ sister publication, Rapport, has determined. Deborah Cox, the famous Canadian R&B singer, songwriter, actress and producer who started her professional career as a backing singer for Celine Dion, wrote in a fiery tirade on Twitter on Monday that SAA did not care about the safety of its passengers. This after the airline decided to fly with a damaged cabin door between Accra in Ghana and the US, and the cabin unexpectedly filled with smoke, ultimately causing the plane to turn back. Cox had performed at a music festival in Ghana and boarded the SAA flight on Sunday night. She took a dramatic video of the “emergency landing”, lamented her fate because she had to wait three hours before the plane could initially depart, and, on top of that, had to return to Accra, from where she had just departed. Cox said she was “shaken” and that SAA was endangering her life by flying further with a “faulty” plane.  But South Africans hit back on Twitter, saying that they are used to driving in taxis and trains without doors. They just have to hang on so they do not fall out. It appears the problems began when a catering truck collided with the door of the Airbus A330-200 at Accra airport. This delayed the flight by three hours so the damage could be repaired. Shortly after the plane finally took off, the crew detected smoke in the cabin and returned to Accra. Passengers were then ordered to sit with their heads between their legs until the plane had landed safely – something which Ernest Claassen, an international flight accident investigator, could find no fault with. “It was not an emergency situation but an unusual one, and therefore all possible preventive measures were put in place in case something went wrong – especially since at that stage, the crew probably did not know the origin of the smoke.” In addition, the aircraft would have had as much as 50 tons of fuel in its tanks for its transatlantic flight and would therefore have to land heavily loaded. Usually, passenger jets first dump the fuel before an emergency landing. “However, the guidelines for pilots are to return to the nearest airport, where a technical problem can be investigated and rectified. In this case, it was Accra. You also do not take any chances with a flight over the sea. So, the crew acted exactly according to the book,” said Claassen. “Smoke in the cabin is not necessarily a catastrophe, nor is a strange smell. Sometimes it is the air conditioning system that emits a smell when the plane takes off or lands because the system is being adjusted. “In many cases, the crew does not even tell the passengers what is wrong. The cabin crew can then use their initiative to decide if they want to tell the passengers to sit with their heads between their legs or if they just want to warn them that it will be an unusual landing. “In this case, and because it was a night flight, the lights in the cabin were switched off, as is always the case. It is true that some passengers will react more nervously than others, but there was no reason to panic.” Cox said in her video that she was also upset because another plane was not immediately available for her flight to the US. SAA sent another aircraft from South Africa that would depart on Monday night. SAA spokesperson Tlali Tlali denied there was a fire on board, as Cox claimed. There was also no indication that the collision with the door and the smoke in the cabin had any connection. “According to our information, oil ended up in the air conditioning system and caused the smoke,” he said. An informed source said: “The fact that the plane is still stranded in Accra is because that leak must now be detected. It could have originated from a variety of places and needs to be repaired now.”