Whether it’s R10, R20 or even R100, every small donation that’s come through to the family of baby Mnqobi, who was born with a congenital deformity called tibial hemimelia, has gone a long way. Tasked with doing the near impossible – raising R3 million for a shot at having the nine-month-old boy be able to walk – Mnqobi’s parents, Nthabiseng Nhlanhla and her husband Mzwakhe, were almost immediately spurred into action to raise the money for their little boy to get the pioneering surgery in the US. Fortunately, theirs has been a journey during which they have received some help. In May, City Press ran an article on the couple’s efforts to raise funds for the surgery at the Paley Orthopedic and Spine Institute in Florida, which would be performed by world-renowned surgeon Dr Dror Paley, and the response from readers wanting to help with donations was overwhelming. According to the institute, the foremost body that provides technologically advanced treatment for such cases, Mnqobi’s condition is so rare that it affects only one in 1 million live births. The condition, which manifests as a shortened leg with knee and ankle deformities, has affected both of Mnqobi’s legs and resulted in them being turned inwards. “The response from people has been amazing. What really touched us was that people really gave us what they could, especially through the Backabuddy page [CrossFit Wanderers – Challenges for Baby Q] and it has accumulated to about R30 000. People have had such nice and encouraging words to say to us,” Nthabiseng said this week. “It’s especially touching because ordinary people found it within their hearts to reach into their pockets and give what they could.” In May, fundraising efforts had already yielded R1.2 million. After raising R200 000 through various initiatives and support from family, friends, companies and also through the Facebook page #HelpQWalk, that figure now stands at R1.4 million. The family also got help from Good Samaritans including Justin Kramer, whose family they met through Baby Bright Stars, a day-care centre. Kramer, who was scheduled to climb Mount Kilimanjaro in October with his Backabuddy team to raise awareness of Mnqobi’s case, has brought the date closer and will undertake the climb next month. “They’re practicing every morning and evening; they’re so committed. Also, it’s not cheap to climb Kili, but they’re willing to do so using their own resources too to raise money for our little boy and we’re so grateful,” Nthabiseng said. While his parents plan their next big fundraising initiatives before the deadline to have the surgery done – by the time he is 18 months old – little Mnqobi and his twin brother Philasande are growing in leaps and bounds. Mnqobi is already defying odds and recently started crawling. “He’s exploring and he’s so dynamic. He gives us so much hope and strength,” his mother said.   