Not only did “Daisy from East London” get a personal letter from President Cyril Ramaphosa, but she got to meet the president in person, and asked him more of the questions that caught his – and the nation’s – attention this week. Daisy Ngedle, an ambitious eight-year-old pupil at Clarendon Preparatory School, shot to fame after she wrote Ramaphosa a letter at the end of last year. Ramaphosa posted about his correspondence with the little girl from East London, who wanted to know whether women could also aspire to be head of state, and South Africans fell in love. City Press reporter Lubabalo Ngcukana interviewed the feisty little girl this week. She said that for a school project last year in Grade 2, they had to write a letter to the president and then her mother, Zenande, posted the letter on social media and it went viral and was shared until it reached Ramaphosa. She said it was even more exciting that the president has asked to met up with her.  Read City Press' interview with Daisy in print on Sunday. In his response to Daisy, Ramaphosa said that girls can be anything they want. “They can be teachers, or scientists or astronauts – and to answer your question, yes they can be presidents too,” he said. In the handwritten letter signed “Daisy from East London”, Daisy told Ramaphosa that he inspired “everyone in this country” and that she wanted to be president like him one day. “You are a strong independent president,” she said, “if you can make the world a better place why don’t you.” He responded: “It means a lot to me that you like my work as president because as I am sure you can imagine, it is not an easy job. “I often have to make really difficult decisions and sometimes people are pleased with the decisions that I make but other people are at times not so happy,” he explained. Daisy wanted to know if Ramaphosa was friends with former president Nelson Mandela. “Yes, he was a friend, a father and a teacher to me and to many other people. Do you know how much he loved children? “I am sure he would have loved to have met a young lady as gracious as you,” Ramaphosa wrote. Ramaphosa said he felt honoured to have received the letter and hoped to meet the young lady when he visits the Eastern Cape this week to introduce the Good Green Deeds programme that is aimed at caring for the planet and its people. “I would be honoured if, after school on the day, you would be able to meet me when I am in your home town. “I am trying my best to make South Africa a better place for our children and our children’s children – and I am so pleased I can count on you to help me,” he concluded.