The DA’s list of candidates for the National Assembly and provincial legislatures ahead of the 2019 general elections is “diverse and capable”, and “nothing like that of the ANC’s list”. These were the sentiments expressed on Saturday by the DA’s federal executive chairperson, James Selfe, as he released his party’s list of candidates for the National Assembly and provincial legislatures ahead of the 2019 general elections, taking place on May 8. “There is not a single other party in South Africa that engages in such a thorough process of selecting their representatives as does the DA,” said Selfe. “We can safely say that individuals put forward by the party to represent it in the National Assembly and the nine provincial legislatures are the best and most capable, who will carry the hopes of the people of this country. “This is in stark contrast to the current majority party, which has nominated people who, frankly, belong in prison and not in Parliament. “How is it that people like Faith Mazibuko, Bathabile Dlamini, Malusi Gigaba, Nomvula Mokonyane, David Mabuza, David Mahlobo, Cassel Mathale, Collen Maine, Siyabonga Cwele and so on are eligible to serve the people, when they have taken so much away? Whether it is Jacob Zuma or Cyril Ramaphosa who is at the helm of the ANC and the country, the people of South Africa will suffer, and corruption will continue,” said Selfe. During the media briefing, the party paraded its own candidates. They include 21-year-old Karabo Lerato Khakhau, a final year student at the University of Cape Town who is earmarked to represent the DA in the Free State legislature. Khakhau said she decided to throw her hat into the ring because of her strong belief in social development. “I grew up in the Free State, which has a population of roughly 2 million, of whom only about 500 000 have formal employment, There are people who still don’t have housing and departments have been given budgets to assist them, yet nothing is being done. These are some of the realities that have informed my decision to avail myself and serve my community,” said Khakhau. While Khakhau and the other candidates presented to the media were optimistic about the party’s chances of gaining more votes come the May 8 elections, it appeared that the DA’s principal representative on the Electoral Commission of SA’s (IEC’s) party liaison committee, Mike Moriarty, had already conceded defeat even before the elections commence. Addressing the media on Saturday along with the DA candidates, Moriarty said his party was working on “bringing the ANC below 60% nationally”. He added that its second objective was “to retain the Western Cape, and thirdly, that we bring the ANC down to below 50% in both the Northern Cape and in Gauteng”. Selfe, who sounded more optimistic, said the diversity of the DA’s candidates across “race, gender, religion, sexual orientation, skill set, class and the blend between youth and experience” meant that “when South Africans viewed the list, they would see themselves in its representation”. “As difficult as the task is of building one South Africa for all, we remain committed to achieving it. We will not be side-tracked by racial nationalists, black or white,” said Selfe. He assured those in attendance that the DA would campaign “and ensure that there is a job in every home, that corruption is stopped, that the country’s borders are secure and that everyone is kept safe by a committed and honest police service”. “Most South Africans suffer unnecessarily because the current government has chosen to put its own interests ahead of the interests of more than 58 million South Africans. This is highlighted by the testimony coming out at the Zondo commission of inquiry and the high-level review panel on the State Security Agency,” said Selfe.