Drugs and gangs are believed to be behind last weekend’s brutal murder of Thoriso Themane, allegedly at the hands of six Limpopo schoolboys. Police confirmed on Friday that they were investigating the possibility of drugs and gangsterism being behind the beating to death of the 27-year-old in Polokwane, in what was initially believed to be a mob-justice attack. Speaking to mourners at Themane’s funeral service at Jack Botes Hall in Polokwane yesterday, Police Minister Bheki Cele hinted that the suspects – aged between 15 and 16 – could have been involved in drugs and gangsterism. Cele questioned the relations between the six minors and three men, all aged 36, who were arrested on Thursday afternoon in connection with Themane’s death. Cele urged parents to look after their teen boys and be observant when their behaviour changed because that could be a sign they were using drugs. Cele also hinted that gangs were involved, saying this should not be happening in Limpopo, a province, he said, that was the most peaceful with far fewer crimes. He urged police to investigate the case properly to ensure the suspects were prosecuted. Cele cited as an example this week’s sentencing of a 17-year-old pupil to 10 years for killing his teacher, Gadimang Mokolobate, last year. The pupil was from the Ramotshere Moiloa High School in Dinokana village outside Zeerust, North West. “Nothing like this should happen. This should be the last one,” Cele said. Limpopo police spokesperson Brigadier Motlafela Mojapelo confirmed on Friday that drugs and gangsterism formed part of their initial investigations. “We are gathering as much information as possible and we will soon be able to determine the motive of the attack. “However, please keep in mind that in case the motive forms the basis of the evidence that must ultimately be adduced in court, we will unfortunately not be able to make it public prior to court appearance,” Mojapelo said. The six teens appeared before a jam-packed Polokwane Magistrates’ Court on Thursday and their case was postponed to tomorrow. Later on the same day three 36-year-old suspects were arrested.