When Orlando Pirates took on Espanyol on Wednesday afternoon in Soweto, the modest crowd that turned up was treated to a football game that was one-sided but full of action that allowed the fans to “oooh” and “aaah” at every move, flash and tackle. It was not the first teams, mind you, but the ongoing under-17 international Future Champions tournament at the Nike Football Training Centre – which was designed and used for the 2010 World Cup. Now in its final contractual year, the tournament is one of the last remaining legacies of the 2010 World Cup, according to tournament director Ray Whelan. “It started in 2008 and we were looking at something to bring the spotlight to Gauteng [ahead of the World Cup]. We suggested bringing in the brands [of the teams] instead of a one-off first team fixture that costs a lot and where the overseas players don’t really feel like they want to be here,” Whelan tells City Press just as another gasp from the crowd forces us to turn our attention to the game on the pitch for few seconds. The Manchester born and bred former business partner of Sir Bobby Charlton had a vision of trying to build on the development potential that was set to explode in South Africa post-2010, but he is just astonished at how well the tournament has progressed. “The 11 years of this tournament has been of development. We’ve seen the tournament grow in stature and reputation, we’ve seen it grow from boys only to girls as well, but it’s not just a tournament it’s a project. A project through which we’ve also coached the coaches and exposed talent through the Future Players programme.” This programme, which affords four youth players with raw untapped talent to travel overseas and experience what it’s like to play football for an elite European team, saw its first winner rise up the ranks and become vice-captain of Banyana Banyana. “We always try to testify to the validity of the process in that our first winner was a girl, and that player has now played in two Olympic Games and is about to play in her first World Cup but when she came to this programme, she had no team. She knew she was a good player, but she had to play with the boys and now that women’s football has taken off, she has grown with it,” Whelan says, before quickly adding that it’s not because of the project that Refiloe Jane succeeded, but it certainly did help give her a platform. Frank shibobos Jane travelled to Manchester after winning the Future Players programme through a series of drills and technical skills test. There she trained with the Manchester City and Everton ladies’ teams and got to experience what it meant it to be a professional footballer. “That trip really put things in perspective for me,” Jane – now an ambassador of the tournament - tells City Press as Pirates concede yet another goal against the Spanish team. “I was 16 years old when I was chosen in the talent search. My brother Frank would take me and would dribble me and give me shibobos in the backyard [as training]. At the age of 8 I joined the boy’s team and started playing in tournaments with boys,” Jane says with wry smile on her face. Jane was not the only national side representative in attendance. As a former Bafana Bafana striker and now assistant coach of Kaiser Chiefs, Shaun Bartlett was there too – not as coach but as a father. “Besides the fact that our team are participating, I also have a son [Reece Bartlett] who’s competing, so I’m just here giving him that moral support. It’s a great tournament because it’s a great platform for these boys to display their talent and for the senior coaches to see possibly who they can bring into the first team,” Bartlett says during the half-time break, where Pirates were already 3-0 down. The match before that, Shaun was sitting in a camping chair leaning forward, nervousness emanating off his body like a cheap perfume as he tried to control his fatherly emotions. “It’s stressful watching your kids playing and especially when everyone knows he’s your son because of the name. There’s even more pressure on them. For me it’s just to be here and give moral support, I don’t criticise them and try to teach them as much as I can. It was encouraging because he’s never played in the striker position, he’s always been a defender,” Shaun says of Reece, who scored a goal the previous day in his position. Asked about the differences between the South African teams and that of the overseas teams, Shaun admits that South Africa has a long way to go because of the nature of the country. He says that most of the children who come through to the academy barely can afford to eat two meals a day and that the coaches help the children out even outside the football pitch. “For me the biggest difference is the mental state - how strong you are in order to get to the next level and get to compete against the best in the world.” “Football is more than just a game on the field at the moment and we need to make sure that we have that holistic approach and work on the players nutritional and mental state.” These differences were made apparent when talking to the technical team of Espanyol, who oversees more than 400 youth in their academy. Each team, from under-8, has at least four dedicated coaches who make sure that their every footballing need is catered to. Spanish armada takes over “We have brought our under-16 side here because we believe they need the international exposure and formation of the player,” Fran Navrro, Espanyol’s grassroot teams’ coordinator, says. “The final goal is to play in the first team of Espnayol,” Navrro says, with the certainty of someone who has seen this development happen. This is Espanyol’s second year in the tournament and the club feels that it a great tournament to develop both the local talent and their own players and, given the opportunity, would definitely attend again, especially because of the physicality of South African players. “After many years in Spain when we kept losing, we changed our philosophy,” Fran explains. “Now all the academies want to produce a complete footballer who is technical, physical and smart and that through that the change the Spanish national team has won a lot recently.” This philosophy change was alluded to by Bartlett who said that, “whether it’s the directive coming from Safa or the PSL where players need to graduate from the academy and get into the first team, that’s another question, but clubs need to take ownership of what programs they are running and getting more players to the first team. After all clubs spend a lot of money on their academies.” Jane believes this is also what is needed. “When we were in Manchester, we saw that players are developed at an early age for the future because they already know that is the future [of their football]. If we can also do this as a nation and have players graduating from one level to another and have that consistency. You can’t have players playing for, let’s say Pirates under-17, and then two years later they are never to be seen again, yet they should be in the under-19 team and then the senior team. There needs to be that level of progression and graduation from the academies.” As she says this, the there’s another attempt lacklustre attempt for the Pirates players. “Players also need to be treated as professional from an early age and need to know that ‘I am footballer and need to take this seriously as this could be my livelihood’, because by the time we get to the professional ranks they are accustomed to a certain level of professionalism.” As we conclude our interview, an Espanyol player is a fouled. His teammates come to his aid and the scuffle ends with a quick yellow card. Immediately the Pirates players realise this is not their place for a scuffle and get back to business. *The tournament ends on Saturday with matches kicking off from 8.15am and the final being played at 13:00. Entrance is free.   