A Limpopo woman and her Nigerian lover, who are implicated in the murder of prominent Limpopo senior civil servant Marks Rambau, are set to know the outcome of their bail application on Wednesday. One of the accused, Khomotšo Comfort Mankuru (25), told the Polokwane magistrate’s court during her bail application last month that she had been involved in romantic relationships with both Rambau and Clement Orobosa Imazobi (27), the latter being the first accused in the case. Rambau was killed on the night of January 12 in Flora Park, a suburb of Polokwane. His body was dumped near a football stadium and set alight. His killers then drove to his house where they stole items including a television set and a car. The state will now argue that both Mankuru and Imazobi lured Rambau to his death. The pair is accused of murder, housebreaking, robbery, theft and defeating the ends of justice. The third and fourth accused, Ibrahim Fazilahmed (32) and Dakalo Mukwevho (25), are facing charges of being in possession of stolen goods. Last month they were released on bail of R5 000 and R10 000, respectively. Judgment on Imazobi’s and Mankuru’s bail applications was postponed this week due to the unavailability of magistrate Janine Ungerer. In an affidavit read by her lawyer, Oupa Kgafane, Mankuru revealed that she had been in relationships with both Rambau and Imazobi at the same time. She said the men had not known that she was two-timing them. She said she had even communicated regularly with Rambau through a cellphone belonging to Imazobi, using WhatsApp. She said she used to delete her chats with Rambau and didn’t know if Imazobi had ever found out about their relationship. Imazobi had allegedly always threatened to kill her if he found out she was seeing someone else. Mankuru said that, on the night of the murder, she received a text message from Rambau, asking to see her. She invited him to Imazobi’s rented residence in Flora Park given that Imazobi often only returned home at about 2am. She said that Rambau sat on the bed while she finished cooking, but things went awry when Imazobi returned well before his usual time and, on finding Rambau there, slapped and attacked him until he died. Mankuru said they then loaded Rambau’s body into his VW Polo and drove to the vicinity of the stadium where they dumped the body before setting it alight. Afterwards they drove to Rambau’s residence in Ivy Park, where they stole the goods, put them in Rambau’s other vehicle, a Jeep Wrangler, and drove away in both cars. Investigating officer Captain Phillip Sekhwela testified that Mankuru and Imazobi later sold the television for R5 000 at Cash Crusaders store in town. Sekhwela produced copies of Mankuru’s identity document and Imazobi’s passport, which they had used for the transaction. He said he had also been shown a video of the pair conducting the sale, which would be handed in as evidence. Sekhwela said they arrested Mukwevho in Polokwane on January 25 after Rambau’s cellphone was traced to him. Mankuru was next to be arrested when it emerged she had given the cellphone to Mukwevho. Sekhwela said Imazobi revealed that he had given the Jeep Wrangler to Fazilahmed. When he was arrested, Fazilahmed told police Imazobi had given him the vehicle so he would hide it. Police traced to a repair shop the VW Polo which Imazobi and Mankuru had loaded Rambau’s body into before dumping it. Sekhwela said police were told Imazobi had brought the car in to be fixed and had also indicated he wanted to sell it. The court also heard that Imazobi was in South Africa illegally. He entered the country on June 20 2016. However, his passport expired on July 20 of that year. Advocate Mashudu Mudau, for the state, said the document was invalid and that Imazobi only applied for a replacement in 2018. Sekhwela said cellphone records showed that Imazobi and Mankuru were together on the night Rambau was murdered. He also said there was a witness who saw the pair dumping the body. He said they both made confessions, admitting to the crime of murdering Rambau. But Mankuru denies it: “I did not murder Marks Rambau,” she said in her submission. She said she had helped to dispose of his body and stole his goods under duress, as Imazobi had threatened to kill her. But Mudau dismissed this, saying Mankuru was an active participant in the crimes because she had failed on more than one occasion to raise the alarm, even when she had the opportunity to do so. –Mukurukuru Media