The ANC leadership in Gauteng wants controversial party members whose names appear on the candidates list for the National Assembly and legislatures to be hauled before the integrity commission. The party’s national candidate list includes disgraced ministers such as Environmental Affairs Minister Nomvula Mokonyane and Minister in the Presidency Bathabile Dlamini. ANC Gauteng provincial secretary Jacob Khawe revealed this week that that the province participated on the selection of candidates at national level on the basis that those who have issues handing around them must either go to the integrity commission or do the right thing. “We were clear. We think national (Luthuli House) has something to learn from the work we do in Gauteng. We don’t cover anybody,” Khawe told City Press this week. This came after the party in the province referred MEC for sport, arts, culture and recreation Faith Mazibuko and West District Municipality Mayor Boyce Maneli, whose municipality invested with the now-defunct VBS Mutual Bank, to its provincial integrity commission. “If it is true there is a hand there, he can’t represent Gauteng in the national Parliament. This time we want people to be vetted so that we don’t have criminals on our list,” Khawe said. Read: 'You want us to remove people because of allegations?' - ANC reveals controversial list This week Mazibuko landed herself in trouble after an audio clip of her pressuring staff to disregard procurement processes in the construction of combi courts to help the ANC in the election was leaked. In the audio, Mazibuko is heard telling senior managers during a meeting she does not want a rollover of the money. “You better do it. I want those, no rollover of that money for combi courts. You two! How you do it, even if you go fly a magic, you better do it. Those combi courts, I want to use (them) to campaign to win the elections. I don’t want to hear stories. If you want to give me stories, then give me your resignation letters. I will fire you, you people who are not prepared to spend my money (sic),” Mazibuko says in the audio. “It doesn’t matter. Don’t tell me (in) English. I want combi courts. That’s all I want. We empower you, you are not empowered. Which department has an Indian that is a CFO, and an HOD who is a mlungu (white)? You must thank me for empowering you. So don’t sabotage me, you better do your work or get out (sic).” Khawe said the party was disappointed with Mazibuko’s utterances. “We have met her. She has explained her condition and the circumstances under which she made the statement. She has forwarded a public apology which we appreciate. We want (her) once more apologise to the white community and Indian community and state that the ANC is a non-sexist and non-racial organisation,” Khawe said. Gauteng premier David Makhura said racism and sexism have no place in the society. “We are uncompromising on the need for officials to follow the law and procurement procedures in line with our stated commitment to clean administration. As the premier, I dismiss with contempt any suggestion that we are fast-tracking delivery of long planned projects or putting in place new place for purposes of winning elections,” he said. This comes after the ANC in the province moved to appease minority groups by including them on the candidates list. It has included Fasiha Hassan, one of the #FeesMustFall leaders, on its list of candidates going to the legislature. “We have said to our branches we may note that some people were not nominated but we can’t have a list of Africans only. We need to have white minorities included on the list,” Khawe said. The list include trade federation union Cosatu Gauteng secretary Dumisani Dakile.