Speculation has been brewing around SABC radio corridors that the resignation of Thobela FM station manager Mosh Matsena this week might be to do with last year’s pesky Summer Song of the Year debacle. Ever since the controversial flare-up – as a result of Skeleton Move by Master KG (Kgaugelo Moagi) being announced as SABC’s Summer Song of the Year over the widely popular King Monada’s Malwedhe in the early hours of New Year’s Day – there’s been a quiet storm over the results at the radio station and among its listeners. It was alleged that Makwena “Kwenisto” Makgakga and producer Alpheus (DJ Boeli) Mailula interfered with the competition. They were suspended. Makgakga explained on social media this week what actually happened prior to him and DJ Boeli announcing the winner of the category. The pair were summarily taken off air over “inappropriate” comments that were said to have pre-empted the outcome of the contest on social media before an official announcement had been made. On Friday SABC spokesperson Vuyo Mthembu confirmed Matsena’s resignation – but denied it was over the Summer Song debacle. “The SABC can confirm that Mosh Matsena has resigned as station manager of Thobela FM to pursue her studies full time. Her resignation, which is not with immediate effect, is not linked to the social media post by DJ Kwenisto Makgakga or any investigation,” Mthembu said. Makgakga’s lengthy Facebook post detailed how the pair were acting on the instruction of Matsena to make the announcement that would result in a change from King Monada winning to Master KG. “About 7pm a message came into our staff wattsap [sic] group from our station manager saying we should call her urgently. Thabo did. Thabo was given instructions, which he gave to me and KV as we were hosting the show together. On my arrival Thabo sat us down and he told us what he was told via the call. The instruction was that the song of the year has changed from Malwedhe to Skeleton Move. It never bothered me. Whether Monada wins or Master KG they are our boys,” the post read. It said: “But on the clock at 00:00 they were 3 songs of King Monada and number 2 was Skeleton Move. At 10:15 while we started the show the station manager called again to emphasise the changes. This time Thabo made loud speaker [put on the loud speaker of the phone]. The instruction was very clear. The song of the year is Skeleton Move no longer Malwedhe. I FOLLOWED THE INSTRUCTIONS.” On Friday Makgakga reiterated his Facebook post saying he stood by what he wrote. He said he could not give his side of the story before as he was still contracted to the broadcaster. He said he decided to speak out to set the record straight. “The whole episode tarnished my name and reputation. They took away my integrity and I couldn’t speak then,” said Makgakga, adding that he was surprised that they were never called to the “so-called investigation to give our side of the story” and “we were left to hang”. He insisted he was not fired but his contract was not renewed. Meanwhile, after some listeners called for the Motsweding FM station manager to be probed, the SABC said those who had made the call should come forward with evidence. On Thursday a group of marchers from Oupa Matla Foundation stormed the SABC building in Mafikeng, demanding, among other things, the removal of Katlego Mokhele, Motsweding FM station manager, and contracts of some radio personalities to be renewed. Mthembu said: “The SABC works with evidence and if any stakeholder has got any information relating to any wrongdoing by the station manager or any SABC employee, we urge them to provide that evidence to the SABC so that the evidence can be tested.”