When all political parties represented in Parliament took a unanimous decision to dissolve both the National Assembly and the National Council of Provinces on Thursday last week, they capped five years of unprecedented madness and chaos never seen in the House. In practice, the curtain on the current Parliament will fall on May 20, but last Thursday’s technical decision was informed by the constitutional requirement to call time on Parliament before the proclamation of an election date. Also, the Constitution dictates that the election should happen within 90 days of the dissolution of Parliament. On Tuesday, President Cyril Ramaphosa proclaimed May 8 as the official election date. Following the tumultuous years that characterised South Africa’s fifth Parliament, the decision to wind down the House should prompt a sober and thoughtful national debate about the quality of people who should occupy the country’s next Parliament. All South Africans who voted for the ANC in 2014 should look back at this Parliament with a deep sense of a buyer’s remorse. What with their votes saddling the country with MPs with extraordinary levels of lunacy. Some of the names that spring to mind include the Baleka Mbetes, Jackson Mthembus, Stone Sizanis, Malusi Gigabas, Bathabile Dlaminis, Mathole Motshekgas, Mosebenzi Zwanes, Lindiwe Zulus, Cedric Frolics and many more. South Africans did not get any value for money for a significant number of the governing party’s MPs who were in Parliament over the past five years. Many were back-benchers in the real sense of the word, only howling here and heckling there, every now and then. Let me remind readers with hazy memories about some of the dishonourable behaviour portrayed by some of the “honourable Members of Parliament” in the list above. On April 6 2016 Mthembu, the party’s chief whip in Parliament, told journalists that former president Jacob Zuma’s violation of the Constitution was not “serious”. This was barely a week after judges of the Constitutional Court delivered a hard-hitting judgment that found that by refusing to comply with former Public Protector Thuli Madonsela’s Nkandla remedial action, Zuma had violated his oath of office. Mthembu, who has since stumbled on his Road to Damascus on corruption in his party, Nkandla and state capture, has a long history of misrepresenting the former president. Without any sense of shame, in March 2012 Mthembu, who was the party’s spokesperson at that time, said Zuma was: “One of our generation’s most intelligent leaders.” Gigaba, who once not only had presidential ambitions, but also looked the part, will now be remembered for a leaked amateur video in which he was playing with his nether regions. The video brought Twitter and other social media to a standstill, and had some female admirers excited for days. It’s a long way down for a man who led the ANC Youth League at the height of its power in post-apartheid South Africa. More seriously, when the story of how state capture, and the Gupta family in particular, destroyed public companies, his name will be right there in the centre of it all. Little is known about how Motshekga arrived on the lonely and less travelled Road to Damascus. Before that, he had arrogated to himself the authority to be Zuma’s enforcer in Parliament, especially on all matters Nkandla. When he was chairperson of the Parliamentary portfolio committee on justice and constitutional development, Motshekga had regular run-ins with Madonsela, under the pretext of holding the Public Protector’s office accountable. In June 2015 the ad hoc committee that Parliament had set up to look into Madonsela’s hard-hitting report on the upgrades at Nkandla visited Zuma’s sprawling compound. Following the visit, the committee had a word for Madonsela’s report – misleading. Commenting about the “fire pool” and the amphitheatre, Motshekga said: “We [the committee] went to Nkandla; we came back with different opinions. We should not, and cannot, apologise when we say that the Public Protector’s report is misleading and has misled the nation.” The mention of former social development minister Bathabile Dlamini’s name will forever conjure up imagines of skeletons tumbling out of a closet, one after the other. In an interview with the SABC in New York in 2016, Dlamini told the SABC that everyone in the ANC had “smallanyana [little] skeletons.” Much of the blame for the anarchy that went down in Parliament over the past five years should be laid at the Speaker’s door – Baleka Mbete. In her unquenchable desire to shield Zuma from accountability, she lost complete control of Parliament, allowing: the jamming of cellphone signals, securitisation of the parliamentary precinct, ejection of members from the house at the slightest provocation, downright violence and the cutting of the television feed on the parliamentary channel. It was under Mbete’s stewardship that Parliament inexplicably but predictably dismissed Madonsela’s hard-hitting Secure in Comfort report as a hatchet job on Zuma. In order to wrap one’s head around Mbete’s staggering failure to carry out her duties, we need to look into the sweeping powers vested in the office of the Speaker by the Constitution. Among others, the Speaker presides over debates, is the executive authority of Parliament, has final authority in interpreting and enforcing rules, maintaining order and decorum and delivering rulings. These are extensive powers which Mbete could have used, not only to keep MPs on the straight and narrow, but also to protect South Africans from being exposed to the calamities which have befallen government companies like Eskom, Denel, SAA, SABC, Petro SA, Ithala Bank, Coega Development Corporation and almost all national and provincial government departments. As a leader of society, when choosing MPs, the ANC may want to consider other factors other than the popularity and political standing of potential candidates. The party already takes into account issues such as the youth and gender. It may want to expand the qualifying requirements to include strict criteria such as skills, education levels, integrity, abilities and experience in both the public and private sectors. If this had been done when the ANC fielded its parliamentary list in 2014, very few, if any, of the current crop of MPs would have made it to the National Assembly. It is about time that the ANC moves away from being a liberation movement into a 21st century party that takes voters, citizens and governance quite seriously.  