Marion Sparg’s article last Sunday (Politics of hurt and betrayal, City Press, February 23 2019) is misguided. It ignores the fact that my response was a reply to an invitation by President Cyril Ramaphosa. It might have been bad manners on my part if I didn’t respond to an invitation made on such an auspicious occasion. I told the presiding officer I felt strongly that I owed the president a response and proceeded to do so when he had returned to the House. It is a fallacy to claim that the president “didn’t need to defend himself, but he chose to...” It is the desperation of conscience that compelled him to try to cover up the damage he had done, and which he remembered when I reminded him of it. In his response, the president did not contradict what I told the House regarding the fact that he wrote to the Special Branch police at the time. Instead, he informed the House that the police pressured him to give evidence against me and the late Muntu Myeza. This raises the question: What had the president written to the police that they wanted him to go and repeat in open court? They could not have taken him to court to say we were innocent! The prosecutor could not have charged us with terrorism without relying on a signed statement that confirmed such a charge! Sparg was not part of the events of that time. The president and I were part thereof. Sparg has assumed for herself the status of a superior who has the authority of judging who superior freedom fighters are and who are not. She claims that “my life has fallen apart”. This is libellous! What evidence is she relying on? No medical check carried out on me has ever returned such a result. Sparg and some of her friends are unaware that I came from the black consciousness movement, and was thoroughly sensitised and schooled against being dominated and abused for my blackness by white people. Those of my generation have insisted on being respected for being who and what we are. When I work with people, I do so out of respect for their humanity, not the colour of their skin. I have no complex when I’m faced with people of lighter complexion. Most of the men and women in organisations such a AfriForum and ToekomsVonk are younger than me – they cannot teach me what is the wrong thing and what is the right thing. Instead, I seek to guide them on how to go about creating racial harmony among the people of South Africa. I don’t fear people with different views to mine because they cannot change who I am if they are wrong. Read: Politics of hurt and betrayal: Why Lekota took aim at Ramaphosa For the record, I have never taken revenge against anybody who testified or informed against me. When I returned from my first prison stint, I didn’t make it my mission to hunt down those who testified against us. Instead, I devoted my energy to protecting the struggle. We formed the United Democratic Front before our second arrest, when we were returned to Robben Island. And I was and remain very proud of the humble contribution I made to the cause of freedom! On our release, I busied myself with the revival of the structures of the ANC and the Convention for a Democratic SA. Incidentally, I fully supported the Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which afforded those who gave information to the Special Branch and other agencies a chance to confess and ask to be pardoned. Many people went to the commission, asked for a pardon and were pardoned. That process ran its course; it is over now. We cannot now be silenced if circumstances require that the truth be told! Lekota is president of the Congress of the People   TALK TO US Do you think President Ramaphosa has adequately responded to Lekota’s allegations? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword LEKOTA and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material