As the world celebrated International Women’s Day on Friday, under the banner “balance for better” - a call on all citizens to strive towards a gender-balanced world - it came as a reminder, but not a surprise, that more still needs to be done should South Africa wish to attain gender parity and eradicate the scourge of sexual assault and rape towards women. Should the country wish to change this worrying phenomenon, it could take a leaf from leading tobacco company Philip Morris’ book. The company on Friday, as part of its International Women’s day commemorations flipped the script, instead of having a traditional event hosted for women, the company opted on bringing its male employees together for an insightful summit led by female speakers who addressed themes that range from gender equality to new strategies for engaging diversity within the workspace. The current reality paints a bleak picture for South Africa, as one cannot switch on the television or log on to social media sites without being reminded of the horrors inflicted on the country’s women. From an appalling video of musician Mandla “Mamphintsha” Maphumulo assaulting his partner Bongekile “Babes Wodumo” Simelane, to seeing Thulani “Pitch Black Afro” Ngcobo appearing in court after he was charged with the premeditated murder of his wife. But it’s not only celebrities who have been found wanting, even the individuals who are holding prominent roles in the country’s political leadership structures have been accused of criminal and sexual acts of violence against women. Prominent politicians and high ranking ANC officials like Mduduzi Manana, Pule Mabe and most recently Zizi Kodwa are just some of the men who have made headlines for either assault or rape. This is not a new phenomenon, even the country’s former president Jacob Zuma was accused of rape. Having been recently awarded the global equality salary certificate for implementing an equal pay for equal work policy, Philip Morris’ executives stressed the need for men to hear from female thought leaders on how to drive diversity which highlighted the pivotal role men have to play in ensuring that gender equality is realized in our life time. Speaking to City Press before the start of the summit held at the prestigious Royal Hotel in Lausanne, Switzerland, the company’s chief executive officer, André Calantzopoulos, stressed the need for seeing beyond gender and treating all employees in a similar manner. “We strive to treat men and women equally, its something that should be obvious and not require documentation to implement. Both men and women have the right to the same remuneration and bonuses and this should be the case everywhere”. He added that it was important for the company’s leadership to take the reigns in such an initiative so that all employees could follow suit and strive for diversity across the board. Communications vice president at Philip Morris, Mariana Salzma, concurred adding that such initiatives were necessary in order to get men see the realities through the lens of their female counterparts. “At Phillip Morris, we talk about giving everyone a fair share, not just women and we recognize that to empower women, we must engage and empower men to be advocates for equality,” said Salzman. On the day, the men were educated on language and how it shapes the way individuals think about gender and culture. They were also put through their paces and schooled on how to approach new ventures, particularly the manner in which they approach female-focused marketing.