He laid a charge of fraud against the “resurrection minister” last week. Now this week, “Prophet” Paseka “Mboro” Motsoeneng, who was embroiled in a Facebook post that claimed he took a photo in heaven, has set his sights on “Prophet” Shepherd Bushiri, the man accused of conning investors out of millions. A video of “Prophet” Alph Lukau, the leader of Alleluia Ministries International, showed him praying for a dead man whom he then “raised from death”. The video circulated on social media and went viral.Motsoeneng, who himself faced public scrutiny following the claims that he had allegedly been to heaven, said that Lukau had brought the Christian faith into disrepute. He marched to his office last week to confront Lukau, but Lukau was not available. Motsoeneng then went to a police station and laid a charge of fraud against Lukau. Read: Show me the proof and I will stand with you, Mboro tells Lukau On Tuesday Motsoeneng, who leads  the Incredible Happenings church, said he would be confronting Bushiri at his Enlightened Christian Gathering for allegedly misrepresenting him over the “fake” Facebook post. In 2016, Motsoeneng made headlines for allegedly charging curious members of his congregation R5000 to see a copy of the heavenly photo as evidence. Responding to these “gone to heaven” allegations, Motsoeneng said he wanted to put the matter to rest – and laid the blame for the fake picture at the feet of Bushiri’s communications team. “I have decided to expose the people who were behind that fake ‘gone to heaven’ miracle campaign. That massive campaign was orchestrated and implemented by my brother in faith, Prophet Shepherd Bushiri’s closest people who were running his PR [campaign] led by Kelvin.” On Tuesday, Motsoeneng said he would be going to the Enlightened Christian Gathering, to get his name cleared, to demand an apology in writing from Bushiri for the “fake” Facebook account. He said he feels that the apology that was issued by Bushiri on SABC was not enough as he insists on getting a written letter that will clear his name.