Bring back Premier Job Mokgoro, the ANC has been told in a letter served on Wednesday by lawyers representing six members of the party in the province. The complainants gave Luthuli House 48 hours to respond – which ends today – or face an urgent court interdict to block the newly appointed rapid response team from running the affairs of the province. Last Saturday the ANC national rapid response team led by Deputy President David Mabuza dissolved the provincial task team led by Mokgoro. The national executive committee, which is the highest organ between national conferences, appointed Mokgoro’s team last year to run the organisation in the interim after it disbanded former Premier Supra Mahumapelo’s provincial executive committee. On Saturday the rapid response team formed a new provincial task team led by senior national executive committee member Obed Bapela and Science and Technology Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane. It also included all 55 members of the disbanded provincial executive committee and provincial task team. The North Gauteng High Court ruled last month the Mahumapelo’s provincial executive committee had been dissolved unlawfully and therefore had to be reinstated with immediate effect. Read: Supra Mahumapelo faces resistance on return to North West The national executive committee had intended to appeal the ruling but the decision was shelved in favour of a political solution that could see President Cyril Ramaphosa offering Mahumapelo a public post after the elections. Read: Minister Mahumapelo? Cyril battles to contain Supra Ramaphosa is scheduled to address the North West manifesto rally tomorrow in Rustenburg, where more than 40,000 people are expected to attend. Shuping Attorneys said this week that the rapid response team was not a constitutional structure and therefore it did not have the powers to disband or appoint any other structures. The lawyers said these powers were constitutionally reserved for the national executive committee. “Our instruction is that the rapid response team acted outside its mandate and against the constitution of the ANC because the rapid response team lacks authority to circumvent or veto the decision of the national executive committee”. Shuping Attorneys said that as a result of the rapid response team’s decision, “the organisation in North West is governed by an unlawful structure and all to the detriment of the organisation itself in general and members in particular”.   