In just a week, the new WhatsApp livestream show, the Sizwe Mpofu-Walsh Xperience – better known as #SMWX – has already made its mark. It attracted 5 000 subscribers in just two days of its launch and grew to more than 7 000 in four days. And the number keeps growing. Mpofu-Walsh decided to be a tech trendsetter by launching the WhatsApp channel. His aim is to get all young social media users to engage with his #SMWX show. The limitless number of people one can interact with on the app is one of the reasons he opted to initiate it. Already, many conversations have taken place. Mpofu-Walsh, who holds an MPhil and is studying towards his PhD through Oxford University, said part of the reason he took this platform to WhatsApp is that “it is the most accessible platform for young South Africans across the country”. “You look at the other social media channels: there is always a limit to the number of people you can reach. But WhatsApp is the most widespread tech channel.” #SMWX has been launched to appeal to the youth and include them more in the political space, especially in narratives about the upcoming elections. It is not a WhatsApp group that will baffle you with endless text coming through. The channel is easy to navigate and allows subscribers to choose from a number of options, including interviews with political analysts and authors, and music videos dealing with political issues. Mpofu-Walsh takes an inclusive approach to politics in that he also tackles socioeconomic issues affecting the youth. “The real reason we started this is because we felt that from all perspectives – no matter what party you support, no matter where you are in society – young people’s voices are not taken seriously, and that is because we are always on the outside looking in, begging for people in power to take us seriously. “What we need to start doing now is build our own platforms. That is what #SMWX intends to be – a platform that is owned and built by a young person and unapologetically looks at South Africa through the lens of a younger generation.” Mpofu is the son of the EFF’s national chairperson, Dali Mpofu. Following the channel’s launch, most tweeps tweeted that #SMWX would promote EFF propaganda. Interestingly, the first guest Mpofu-Walsh interviewed on the show was political activist and EFF member Naledi Chirwa. This raised eyebrows, but Mpofu-Walsh defended his choice by saying he has many guests from different political parties lined up for the show and Chirwa happened to be the first one. “I am unapologetic about the fact that young black women who are on their way to Parliament need to be given a platform and more exposure than they’ve had in mainstream media. This platform is not funded by or the project of any political party.” #SMWX was translated into isiXhosa in just four days; Mpofu-Walsh plans to make it available in all 11 languages. “We want to reach people in ekasi and villages. We want this to go far.”