Former Bosasa chief operating officer Angelo Agrizzi is headed back to the Zondo commission on state capture early next month with even more files to reveal. Since he wrapped up his initial testimony earlier this year, Gavin Watson’s former right-hand man has been in fear for his life after receiving threats by phone, text message and even written on a note placed under his car’s windscreen wiper. City Press has learnt that Agrizzi has compiled a 120-page supplementary affidavit in which he further details how Bosasa, now known as African Global Operations, allegedly paid bribes to politicians and officials. “The new affidavit has more names and evidence to back up the allegations he will be making,” said one source privy to the details. “The affidavit was compiled in consultation with the state capture commission investigators. According to the discussions, he is set to take the stand again in April, which will be followed by cross-examination. "A number of individuals have already requested to cross-examine him.” Agrizzi (51) confirmed to City Press that he has been receiving an increased number of death threats since his initial testimony. “Some came in the form of text messages, calls and a message placed on my car windscreen. I cannot divulge more details regarding these issues as they are also under investigation by the Hawks,” he said. He confirmed he would be returning to the commission, but declined to reveal further details. “All I can tell you is that, after the testimony, you might meet me at my funeral. "I am afraid of what will happen after the testimony, but I am going ahead with what I have already started,” he said. Agrizzi was arrested last month on charges of fraud, corruption and money laundering relating to activities that took place at Bosasa. He told the commission in January that Bosasa boss Watson offered him R50 million for his silence after he threatened to reveal details of alleged corruption at the company during his 18 years there. In his previous affidavit submitted to the commission, Agrizzi listed several senior politicians and civil servants who received money from Bosasa, including former president Jacob Zuma’s foundation, which was allegedly paid R300 000 a month to advance Bosasa’s business interests and to ensure it would be safe from prosecution; former SAA chairperson Dudu Myeni, who allegedly received a Louis Vuitton handbag; and Environmental Affairs Minister Nomvula Mokonyane, who allegedly received cash gifts worth about R120 000 a year for Christmas, and food and expensive alcohol for family functions. Myeni and Mokonyane have denied the allegations.