Northern Cape Premier Zamani Saul has refuted claims purporting that he raped a woman and has reported the @Dbn_Survivors Twitter handle, which published these allegations, to the police. “The premier has already referred the specific tweet and Twitter handle to the relevant law enforcement agencies for investigation and further action,” Saul’s spokesperson Bronwyn Thomas-Abrahams said on Wednesday afternoon. The allegations have been labelled as “lousy attempt to denigrate the integrity of the premier”, by Thomas-Abrahams. “Saul has always been an ardent advocate for the rights of women and more specific the rights of children and the disgusting allegations are dismissed with the urgency and contempt it deserves,” Thomas-Abrahams added. The @Dbn_Survivors has published an anonymous complaint where the alleged survivor details how Saul raped her when she was still in high school. The victim goes on to mention that there were many other young girls who were allegedly raped by the premier. “I was a small kid who used to wear a uniform, knew nothing about sex. He would force himself on to me, even made me abort his child … this man is trash. His name is Zamani Saul,” the post read. The ANC in the Northern Cape has issued a statement in support of Saul, who holds the position of provincial chairperson in the province. The party acknowledged the seriousness of the allegations and called the accusations made against Saul “false allegations that seek to discredit and cast aspersions on the integrity of the provincial chairperson”. “We have encouraged the provincial chairperson to explore all available legal means to expose those faceless people running such malicious campaigns. We will not be deterred in our task of forging unity and building the organisation,” the statement read. A social media trend of naming and shaming alleged perpetrators emerged this week after incidents of gender-based violence dominated the headlines. This includes a story of the brutal rape and murder of University of Cape Town student, Uyinene Mrwetyana, allegedly by post office worker, Luyanda Botha. Another incident involves police officer Bulelani Manyakama who allegedly shot and killed boxing champion Leighandre “Baby Lee” Jegels. Manyakama was arrested on Friday after he was involved in a head-on collision near Peddie. He succumbed to his injuries on Monday.   Political journalist | City Press