Before you marinate that chop in preparation for placement on the braai on Tuesday, Heritage Day, ask yourself these questions: Is it a lean cut? Have you trimmed the fat? Or, better yet, how about opting for skinless chicken or fish, and rubbing it down with salt-free spices and heart-healthy, home-made marinades? These are just some of the suggestions put forward in the newly launched braai edition of the Cooking from the Heart recipe book series – a partnership between the Heart and Stroke Foundation of SA (HSF) and Pharma Dynamics. It is no secret: South Africa has a fat problem. We eat too much and we drink too much. According to the foundation, half of South Africans aged 15 and older are classified as being overweight, while 12% of men and 40% of women are classified as obese. The World Obesity Federation estimates that by 2025, 60% of South African adults will be classified as being overweight or obese. Moreover, heart disease, strokes, type 2 diabetes and hypertension claim 30.1% of all deaths in South Africa. But there is hope in this regard: according to the Cooking from the Heart initiative, at least 80% of the incidence of heart disease, stroke and type 2 diabetes, and 40% of the incidence of cancer can be prevented if you adopt a healthier lifestyle and make healthier food choices. The latest in the cookbook series is the braai edition, which is full of healthy recipes and advice on enjoying nutritious fare without overindulging. It has received the go-ahead from local braai master Jan Braai. “The point of the cookbook is to initiate lifestyle changes – and not just for one day,” Wilmi Hudsonberg, spokesperson for Pharma Dynamics told City Press this week. “This heart-healthy recipe book is aimed specifically at helping patients with chronic diseases. Through the cookbook, we are trying to educate people and show them how small changes are more sustainable and can lead to much healthier lifestyles. The biggest thing about chronic diseases is that they are initiated by lifestyle. So, we need to start looking at the lifestyle along with the medication that is in line with international guidelines. “In terms of the recipes, they are all tailored to incorporate current cuisine in South Africa. For example, a braai is a sacred thing here, so we are not saying: ‘Have an exotic diet.’ We are simply tweaking the things you already eat, such as potato salads, slightly,” she said. Speaking of potato salad, the new recipe punted in the book is one that leaves out the mayonnaise, keeps the skin on and has a herb dressing. And you don’t have to let go of that local favourite, pap: there is a mielie meal and corn bake alternative. The book advises readers to fill their plates with grilled vegetables, salads and side dishes. The more colour you add, the better – we’re talking red, green or yellow peppers, butternut, baby marrows, eggplant, mushrooms and onions. Place on the skewer and brush with olive or canola oil before grilling. Read: Sugar industry in grip of a bitter crisis Pamela Naidoo, chief executive of the HSF, said: “The Cooking from the Heart initiative aligns with our focus on preventing diseases such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes and obesity. The increasing prevalence of noncommunicable diseases in South Africa can be reduced by implementing healthy eating habits, which are easy to maintain when using the Cooking from the Heart resource as a guide. Healthy eating, along with other good lifestyle choices, further prevents the onset of cardiovascular disease.” Health journalist | City Press  