Every week President Cyril Ramaphosa will be getting to grips with issues and challenges which the country faces, by discussing them in his new weekly letter, titled From the Desk of the President. The inaugural letter, which went out on Monday, begins with the president saying that he hopes the nation will find the letter useful. Drawing attention to the concern brought forward by business leaders about the economic climate, high unemployment rates and deepening poverty, Ramaphosa says that people are “looking for signs of progress in tackling the many challenges confronting our country”. He labels the concerns as “real”. “This year, the economy will record growth that is lower than expected [and much lower than what we need],” he says, adding that several industries are looking to retrench workers given the tough economic climate. Twenty months ago, according to the president, there was far more confidence, which “has dissipated as the reality of the problems we face become clearer”. The president says that the “important issue is that we should move in a determined way to effect change while remaining irrevocably committed to rooting out state capture, corruption and malfeasance”. Ramaphosa also speaks about the progress that has been made in turning the country around, referring to the changes which have taken place in state-owned enterprises like the National Prosecuting Authority, Sars, the police force and the State Security Agency, and how these changes have “given people confidence that we can restore the credibility and integrity of the state”. Creating employment opportunities is a thread that is carried throughout the letter. Rampahosa says that, on the first Monday of each month, he and Deputy President David Mabuza will meet “leaders of business, labour and the community sector to review the implementation of measures agreed at last year’s jobs summit”. During last year’s jobs summit, commitments were made to assist the growth of small businesses as well as interventions to support “drop outs” and matrics, in order to have the competencies for employment and self-employment. If you would like to receive the president’s letter every week, sign up here: https://thepresidency.us20.list-manage.com/subscribe?u=dcd34ec94620d939a2de5e60c&id=89b4e8e862