Deals brokered by African leaders with foreign governments and multi-national corporations were, at times, self-serving and not for the long-term interests of their people. This, said US Reverend Dennis Dillon, has resulted in Africans fighting among each other instead of dealing with their common problem – the current global capitalist system. Dillon is the founder and president of the Door of Our Return (Door), a movement that was officially unveiled during a media briefing at the Pan African Parliament in Midrand, Gauteng, last week. Among those present at the briefing was businesswoman Bridgette Motsepe-Radebe, the wife of Jeff Radebe, an ANC veteran who has held various ministerial posts since 1994. Motsepe-Radebe was also appointed in August as a goodwill ambassador for the Pan African Parliament. Others included senior leaders of the Black Business Council and the National Foundations Dialogue Initiative, who pledged their support for the movement. Various events were already on the cards to take place in the country, Ghana and Senegal in November, and expected to result in trade agreements signed between Afro-American business leaders, African cities and governments that could pave a way for Africans to sell their products and also invest in the US, and for Afro-Americans doing the same in Africa. The Door movement was coined around 400 years since Africans were shipped to the colony of Virginia, US. It was initially launched in New York in May to mark a “homecoming” event of descendants of slaves that will enable them to make economic contribution towards the upliftment of Africa and establish investment relations with the continent. This move comes after a spate of violent incidents in recent weeks against foreign nationals in Johannesburg and Pretoria, which have been linked to xenophobia and criminality. Dillon told City Press on the sidelines of the media briefing that a commitment to a Pan-African unity was required where Africans will begin to understand that “the real enemy is not your brother or your sister”. “The real enemy are those that come and take from you and pit you against your brother so that you are constantly fighting while they are continuing to loot everything that is around you. We need to work with African governments to raise their consciousness. I’m not anti any group, any race, any nation coming into a particular country or community to do business or invest in that community or country. The fact of the matter is that unfortunately most of the agreements that are being signed by these governments are self-serving and do not serve the larger long term interests of these countries and our people and our communities,” Dillon said He said he didn’t think the attacks on foreign nationals were related to xenophobia. What happened in the country, he said, was happening across the globe. “When you can’t reach your enemies you begin to see your friends as your enemies. I’ve been calling for us to begin to look at the bigger enemy. We are here fighting over 28% [profits or mineral resources] that is left as opposed to fighting to get back some of the 72% that is being taken,” he said. After the fights, he said, people go back to buy in stores they did not own. “We are fuelling the economy of everybody else and keep ourselves locked in a place of economic depression. This is unique kind of poverty because, at the end of the day, to whom you give your money is to whom you give your power.” This creates a scenario where African states end up not having enough jobs, resources and capacity. He said what motivated him to initiate the movement was that Africa was perceived to be poor despite immense mineral wealth and talent on the continent. “So, we are motivated by saying after 400 years after enslavement in America, the fact that America has led so many great movements and initiatives, we cannot sit by and let the 400 years go by – that initiate a return. The fact of the matter is that this return cannot be symbolic, cultural, social, humanitarian because we [their forebearers] didn’t go to America for those reasons. We went to America for the economic gain and economic empowerment of England, Spain and Portugal. So when we come back 400 years later, we need to come back with an economic agenda and that’s really the key motivation for a movement like this,” he said. Dillon continued: “By the way we will never achieve true political stability in the absence of economic power. That’s why our entire focus in this agenda is economic power even though we taking along with us political leaders, we are guiding them to understand the economic agenda that they must pursue on behalf of their constituency and their people because if we gain that stability then we will have better control of communities, nations and our cities.” He said they would be creating more black owned businesses from the bottom up. “We’ve got to build our economic infrastructure. I’ve also believed in a two-tier approach to this. Number one, we have to build businesses and number two, we have to punish the major corporations who come into Africa, our communities and exploit. At the end of the day, they really don’t care about anybody. All they want to do is to take as much as they can. We are going to have to find a way to decrease the impact of that while we increase our own indigenous ownership and control,” Dillon said adding that they were expecting resistance from the rich countries, but the project would go ahead. Speaking at the briefing, Motsepe-Radebe said it was time to revolutionise the current global economic system to deal with the injustices of the past.   Journalist | City Press