Some of the headlines in your City Press newspaper today: Denel blows R250m arms deal with Chad State arms company Denel has failed to deliver army vehicles to the Chad government despite receiving an upfront payment of R100 million, leading to a diplomatic spat. Busi fights to keep 'rogue unit' report Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane fights to keep “rogue unit” report as part of her record on the Pravin Gordhan appeal after State Security Minister Ayanda Dlodlo applied to remove it. Mkhwebane has also taken up her grievance against Judge Potterill, who called her ruling vague and nonsensical. How the EFF bullied a KZN member A recording reveals how an EFF leader was caught warning a member that her career would be destroyed if she failed to remove her name from the party’s candidate list. No early congress for the DA DA leader Mmusi Maimane breathes easier after the party decided not to bring forward its congress. Maimane sympathisers say the decision bodes well for the embattled leader. Cedar Park's Gupta bargain The City of Johannesburg under the ANC leadership gave away prime land in Sandton to a Gupta-linked company. Judges hinder war against illegal migration Home Affairs Minister Aaron Motsoaledi has railed against how the judiciary is frustrating the battle to contain asylum seekers entering South Africa. Who will play Lebo Mathosa? Songbird Kelly Khumalo and Bahumi Madisakwane have been tipped to star as Lebo Mathosa on the late iconic singer’s upcoming biopic titled The Lebo Mathosa Story, set to be released later in the year. “SABC boss must fall” The public broadcaster’s CEO Madoda Mxakwe must be held liable for the incorrect broadcast of President Cyril Ramaphosa’s address to the nation on gender-based violence, say two board members. But Mxakwe says the pair are interfering in operational matters and the editorial independence of the SABC. Fans flock to Comic Con Despite the initial dismay over stars’ no shows, the event continues to attract record numbers.