A woman is suing Foschini in the Pretoria High Court after staff at one of its stores accused her of stealing perfume and allegedly pushed her head into a toilet, which was then flushed. Lettie Molewa (41), a vendor from Protea Glen in Soweto, has instituted a damages claim against the Foschini Group over the incident, which allegedly took place at Centurion Mall. Molewa claims in court papers that the outlet manager and six members of staff forced her into a storeroom on October 12 2014, held her for more than two hours and allegedly hit her with clothing hangers, chairs and steel railings. She also alleges she was hit in the face, and then her head was pushed into a toilet. Molewa’s cellphone was allegedly flushed down the toilet during the incident, and the R3 000 she had on her after working as a vendor was confiscated from her. She is claiming more than R2.3 million in damages from Foschini. The company, which is opposing the claim, has taken exception to Molewa’s particulars in the claim, arguing she had not explained how her quality of life had been influenced by the events, or what bodily injuries she may have suffered. At the end of last month, the court upheld the exception against the particulars of the claim and ordered Molewa to amend her court papers and explain these aspects. According to Molewa, she sustained a head injury and a bladder injury, and her left hip was also affected. There were grazes on her back and bruises on her leg, stomach and face. She said the injuries left her disabled as she now has permanent headaches, and is becoming increasingly forgetful. Her hip injury also causes pain, cramps and discomfort, which inhibits her mobility. Her ability to control her bladder has also been affected. As a food vendor, Molewa had earned about R900 a week, but, as a result of the alleged assault and the injuries she sustained, she could not work for three weeks. As a result of the loss of control to her bladder, she is no longer able to man her stall and make food to sell, she alleges. Foschini is yet to file its response to the case.