Service delivery issues, corrupt leadership and factional battles are sowing discontent among former party loyalists in troubled Maluti-a-Phofung The ANC has identified ongoing internal disputes as the reason it lost 10 wards in the Maluti-a-Phofung municipal by-elections, held in the Free State on Wednesday. Sixteen councillors who were expelled by the ANC – after they were accused of working with the opposition to unseat former mayor Vusi Tshabalala, a known ally of secretary-general Ace Magashule, who faces a raft of corruption charges – ran as independents. They came back to haunt the party after winning 10 of the 15 wards being contested. Paratlhane Motloung, spokesperson for the councillors, said they had weakend support for the ANC by using their “good standing” in the community to campaign as independent candidates. “The community has had enough of the ANC. Now that we are outside, it was easy to speak to the community. What the ANC miscalculated was the councillors they had expelled. These people are part of the community,” Motloung said. In the by-elections, the ANC retained only five wards and lost 10 to the independents. Known as the Map 16, the group of councillors was heavily invested in campaigning for President Cyril Ramaphosa in the period leading up to the 2017 Nasrec elective conference, opposing the dominant faction in the province whose members were led by Magashule. “The 16 councillors were part of CR17 despite being council members, so these divisions were formed during the elective conference,” Motloung said. He said this was why the ANC’s provincial leadership saw fit to expel them. This, after the councillors went against party protocol and voted for Gilbert Mokotso to be mayor, following the dismissal of Magashule acolyte Tshabalala. The group said they had expected Ramaphosa to intervene in the matter, but to their disappointment, the president did not get involved. “We feel like the president and the people who were part of the CR17 campaign nationally let us down, especially Ramaphosa,” Motloung said. “He came here on April 5 as part of national and provincial election campaigning, asking the people of Maluti-a-Phofung to vote for the ANC and telling them that he would look into the case of the 16 councillors.” The Map 16 group is lobbying for more members of the governing party to join them. Motloung believes that they will succeed in attracting “disgruntled comrades” – referring to an ANC faction in the province known as the disgruntled group, who have had a close alliance with the councillors. The disgruntled group believe the by-election results have vindicated them. “We knew that the community was on the side of Map 16. We hope that this stands as a lesson for the ANC in the province,” said spokesperson Kgomotso Tsitsi. He told City Press that residents were reluctant to vote for the ANC because of the lack of service delivery and corrupt leadership in the province. He cited Kestell, a small maize-farming town whose residents have only had intermittently running water for the past 15 years, as an example of this. Nomalima Mdabane, who resides there, said she has had to rely on a tap located in the centre of town since moving to Kestell Extension 5. “There has been no water since I came to stay here. They send water tankers, but this does not happen all the time. We have to walk to houses where there is running water.” Another resident, Kelebohile Motloung, said she had been a loyal ANC supporter but had learnt the hard way that the party did not work for the people. “When there are jobs, they are given to people who are not struggling. They do not even follow the proper procedure when hiring people. They always act like they care around election time, but after we vote, they disappear,” she said. Ntshwaki Mahini said she was unhappy about the leaders in the municipality, adding that she was shocked to discover that Tshabalala had been redeployed by the party to a higher position. Tshabalala is now the ANC’s chief whip in the legislature. He was mayor when the municipality was placed under administration in February. Maluti-a-Phofung was identified in Auditor-General Kimi Makwetu’s report as being among those municipalities showing the highest irregular and wasteful expenditure. For the past few months, municipal workers have not received their salaries on time. The municipality has had to negotiate with National Treasury to release the equitable share grant to pay its workers. When asked why Tshabalala still holds a position, ANC Free State spokesperson Thabo Meeko was evasive in his response, merely saying: “The ANC is an organisation that listens to its people. We are perfecting that art of listening to people and being able to act. “The ANC is committing that it will be more decisive. Our people are rejecting us and the ANC is about the people; it cannot be about one person.” The party has gone back to the drawing board after its dismal performance in this week’s by-elections. Meeko said it would take measures to ensure that issues of service delivery were resolved. “Part of our agenda will be to attend to the region. I am sure that the ANC provincial executive committee will suggest a programme to elevate the region. “The election outcomes are sending us a strong message to self-correct and service our people. We need to ensure, before provincial elections, that the structures will have been renewed,” Meeko said. With a total of 69 wards under its belt, the ANC still enjoys an outright majority in 37 wards, while opposition parties occupy 32 wards. TALK TO US Do you see independent candidates playing a greater role in future elections? SMS us on 35697 using the keywords MAP 16 and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material 