Just days before he filed an answering affidavit in a civil claim over the sale of millions of rands worth of works by Dumile Feni, celebrated gallerist Monna Mokoena was slapped with a criminal complaint. This comes as new information raises questions about whether Mokoena has been casting posthumous Feni sculptures unlawfully and selling them without telling the artist’s family. Criminal charges laid Mokoena is being accused of the theft of R12 million in a case opened at the Norwood Police Station in Johannesburg on August 17 by Feni’s daughter, Marriam Diale. The case was swiftly transferred, City Press believes, to Hillbrow’s commercial crimes unit. Mokoena, who co-owns Gallery Momo in Johannesburg and Cape Town, did not respond to detailed questions sent to him this week. He has previously told City Press: “I’m shocked by what Marriam is saying. Most of it is completely false, and that which is not false is a complete misrepresentation of what has happened.” The criminal complaint and the civil action are based on a dozen Gallery Momo invoices totalling about R8 million obtained by Diale and her lawyers, as well as media reports about a record-breaking R6 million sale of a posthumous cast of a Feni sculpture called The Prisoner. Diale, representing the Dumile Feni Trust, says she gathered Feni’s works from across the globe with financial assistance from Mokoena and signed an exclusive deal with him to sell them. According to the deal, he would take 40% of the proceeds. She terminated the agreement in May and is demanding all of her father’s works back. While Mokoena claims sales of the Feni works were slow, Diale claims he hid sales from her. She accuses him of making a fortune from Feni and so increasing his powers in the art world while she and her children live in abject poverty. Civil case answered City Press is in possession of Mokoena’s answering affidavit in the civil case against Gallery Momo, which is being brought before the Johannesburg High Court. In it, he denies various claims made by Diale, especially about the deal made between them, which she says was with the estate and he appears to say was with the trust established by friends of Feni who were working with Diale. Feni, regarded as a South African art master, went into exile in 1968 to the UK and the US, often leaving work behind with friends and at galleries. He was homeless at times and always impoverished. Mokoena is at pains to state that he advanced money to Diale over the years, something she has not denied and includes proof of in her affidavit. But she claims she saw only R500 000 worth of the sales that are believed to be in the region of at least R14 million, but which could be as high as R40 million. Mokoena responds that many of the works he sold were acquired through third parties and not from Diale, however, he says the value of these works totals less than R400 000. The R6 million sculpture he says was the result of a misunderstanding – the buyer thought it was R600 000 and the sale was cancelled. Yet he appears to admit that he owes Diale just more than R2 million from sales after VAT and his commission are deducted. The affidavit sidesteps questions asked by Diale about moulds created from six iconic Feni sculptures. It was agreed that a limited number of posthumous castings would be made of each of the six, and the moulds would then be destroyed. The mystery moulds Diale says she does not know what happened to the moulds, which Mokoena took into his possession. With Diale’s help, City Press tracked them down to The Loop Art Foundry in White River in Mpumalanga. Owners Michael and Elvy Canadas said they had cast more than 20 Feni sculptures for Mokoena since 2011. They are now caught in the middle of the war. Days after the criminal complaint was lodged, Elvy told City Press that she was told by Mokoena that he had sent a truck to collect all Feni moulds and works from Loop, and that he wanted to give them to Diale. However, when Diale’s lawyers insisted that Elvy could not hand them over, she received a letter from Mokoena threatening her with legal action should she give them to Diale. “My attorney has said to keep them safe until a court instructs me what to do,” Elvy said. In a surprise development, Elvy then counted the moulds while on the phone to City Press. She said there were 12 in total and 11 resin copies of the moulds. But Diale says she and Mokoena had agreed to only six moulds being made. She wants to know if Mokoena has been illegally casting and selling sculptures on the side. It is unclear how many other foundries, if any, have been tasked with casting Feni sculptures by Mokoena, but Diale believes there are others. “When I think about the conditions in which my father lived and worked ... for his legacy to now be milked and abused is very hard to take,” Diale said.   