An attorney who likes to play tennis early in the morning wants the Pretoria High Court to order the up-market Silverstone Country Estate, where he lives, to turn on the tennis court’s floodlights for him and his family in the morning. Chabeli Molatoli, the attorney in question, brought an urgent application asking the court to compel the estate to turn the lights on at 6am because this is the only time he has to play tennis. Molatoli argued that he and his family were being deprived of the use of the court and other communal facilities. He had asked for an order that the court be lit from 6am between Monday and Saturday. Judge Cassim Sardiwalla struck the matter from the roll because the application was filed too late. Molatoli owns a property in the estate. He said in court papers that the estate was intentionally keeping the lights off at 6am to prevent his family from using the court. He also wanted an order banning the use of the court by nonresidents between 6pm and 9pm for, among other things, fitness classes. According to Molatoli, nonresidents make use of the court but do not contribute to the maintenance or electricity costs. The only time Molatoli can play is before work from 6am to 7.30am. He said his family began playing tennis early in the morning last December, but a month ago the court lighting was turned off. On making enquiries, he heard that it was because the estate’s board had received complaints about disturbances of the peace from some residents. Molatoli denied his family made a noise in the morning and said most residents were leaving for work at 6am. He said that the 30 to 40 people who use the court at night often continued making a noise until 10pm. He could not understand how two or three people – his family – could make so much noise in the morning that it disturbed other residents. Charlene Crous, estate manager, said in court papers that the decision of the estate directors to install timer switches on the lights was made after thorough consideration and after following due process. She said it was not a rash decision aimed at Molatoli. She said the time switches were installed on July 15 to save electricity. The lights now work only between sundown and 9pm. She argued that the matter was not urgent and accused Molatoli of abusing the court’s process. Crous submitted photographs in court that were taken at 6.05am on September 10. She said the photos showed that there was enough daylight at that time to use the court. Molatoli, however, argued that he could not see the balls at this time of the morning. If you had the chance to play tennis in the morning, would you? Is the resident’s request reasonable? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword TENNIS and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material  City Press 