Crime intelligence officials allegedly conspired to implicate former Hawks bosses Anwa Dramat and Shadrack Sibiya in the unlawful deportation of Zimbabwean suspects to their home country. In an attempt at covering up this unlawful conduct, the officials went as far as making death threats against former Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) boss Robert McBride and other Ipid officials. This was the testimony submitted at the state capture commission by national head of investigation in the directorate, Matthews Sesoko, on Wednesday. Sibiya and Dramat both stood accused of planning and executing a 2010 operation that led to the illegal repatriation of five Zimbabweans, who were wanted by their country’s police for the murder of a senior officer. An investigation by Ipid, conducted before Ipid head Robert McBride’s arrival, recommended that the pair be criminally prosecuted on charges of kidnapping and defeating the ends of justice. However, after a review of all the evidence by McBride, he ruled differently and submitted a second report absolving Dramat and Sibiya. “On reviewing the initial investigations, it became clear to us what the intention was [in charging Dramat and Sibutha],” Sesoko said. “It was an orchestrated effort to paint Dramat in a bad light. Had our report found wrongdoing or if we had succumbed and manipulated the evidence and made a conclusion that Dramat must be charged for any wrongdoing, we would not have found ourselves in a situation we found ourselves in,” he added. Read: Charge Dramat, McBride and Sibiya over illegal rendition Sesoko also alleged that he was unduly excluded from the investigations that later became known as the Zimbabwean rendition investigations – rendition referring to the practice of sending a foreign suspect back to their country knowing fully well that the individual would not be afforded humane treatment. Sesoko detailed how he was approached by then executive director of Ipid, Francois Beukman, to assemble a team to investigate the rendition of five Zimbabwean nationals between 2010 and 2011. To his surprise, said Sesoko, Jenny Qoboshiyane – who was the secretary for police – later informed him that then police minister Nathi Mthethwa wanted them (Ipid) to hold off on the investigation until further notice without giving tangible reasons. As a means of derailing Ipid, Sesoko said dubious charges were filed against most senior Ipid officials. “I was arrested and, at the time, a senior government official. I don’t understand why warrants of arrests were given against us as we were not a flight risk. We were taken to the police cells and later granted R1500 bail.” “It was the most humiliating point of my life as the incident [the arrests] was turned into a big spectacle with journalists present,” said an emotional Sesoko. He also told commission chairperson, deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo, that “one of our investigators, Mandla Masango, received death threats, two text messages and later Ipid boss McBride also received death threats”. Responding to the allegations made by Sesoko, Zondo requested that he make a list of all the incidents where other law enforcement agencies were intimidating or interfering with Ipid’s work. “We cannot clean up corruption in our general public when corruption itself is festering within law enforcement itself,” said Zondo.