Here are some of the headlines in your City Press newspaper today: Xenophobia: 'Police have no plan': The failure of crime intelligence left the police in a vacuum, with no clear direction on how to respond to the rising crisis. There are no safe spaces for women and children: We must teach our children: Living in fear is not the answer, but having a plan is – as is teaching women’s rights to voice. Inside the arts funds crisis: The National Arts Council again postpones funding announcements as insiders say they fear the process has been hijacked. Everyone can win against Public Protector: Advocate Busisiwe Mkhwebane has long been lambasted for incompetence, but says the odds were stacked against her office from the start Busisiwa reels from violent attack: Gqom star’s baby daddy faces assault charge for allegedly beating her and a friend. He claims he caught the two “having sex”. Name and shame: Internationally acclaimed actor, director and playwright John Kani adds his voice to the public outcry against gender-based violence. The rogue cop and his hitmen: Witnesses have recounted how a Durban policeman and his gang terrorised and extorted the Glebelands Hostel. ANC’s policy is ‘inadequate’: Activists red-flag draft policy on sexual harassment for exemptions and its lack of consultation . Uyinene laid to rest: A tearful and emotional funeral for the student whose disappearance and brutal murder shook SA during weeks of unprecedented femicide. Femicide divides the DA: The DA’s parliamentary caucus was divided this week on how it should contribute to the debate on femicide, ultimately resulting in four MPs walking out. Lesbian mums go to court over culture clash: A divorced lesbian couple are embroiled in a bitter dispute over their children – after one of them began an affair with a black man. SA ready to expunge dagga criminal records: Thousands of people with convictions for dagga possession could soon have their criminal records expunged. On the run from marauding mob: Hostel dwellers go on the rampage, attacking not only foreigners but locals, terrorising ‘anyone who sounded’ foreign. Comic culture takes over South Africa: You’ve seen them on the big screen; now Joburg lets you experience the characters, costumes and related hype at a three-day festival and at its premium art gallery. Finding the farms that work: Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma embarks on a fact-finding mission to see how a unique farming project is empowering and changing lives. The rise and fall of Mugabe: Despot, narcissist and murderer – The one-time hero has left behind a country in ruins, its economy in tatters, its moral fabric torn by poverty and suffering Zimbabweans divided on his legacy.