Here are some of the headlines in your City Press newspaper today: Tito feels ANC wrath: Finance Minister Tito Mboweni stands his ground in the face of widespread criticism of his ‘neoliberal’ report and accusations of contravening party policy Ten cents a gantry for e-tolls? Ten cents for passing each gantry up to a maximum of R100 a month – a discount of 70% of the current fees for Gauteng’s e-tolls – or scrapping them completely. These are some of the proposals by the task team set up by President Cyril Ramaphosa. Gordhan saves SAA from rescue: A last-minute intervention by Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan has put the brakes on a court application to place SAA under business rescue. How Emfuleni wasted millions: Municipality to charge officials for pouring money down drain, bringing service delivery to a halt Smoke, mirrors and Agrizzi: In the week that Bosasa head Gavin Watson died in a car crash, a new book by James-Brent Styan and Paul Vecchiatto recounts Angelo Agrizzi’s corruption allegations against his former boss. Vice Chancellor’s indecent proposal: Former University of Limpopo professor accuses the VC of propositioning his wife and offering to buy her a car. Why the ANC lost 10 wards: Service delivery issues, corrupt leadership and factional battles are sowing discontent among former party loyalists in troubled Maluti-a-Phofung. Gallerist faces criminal complaint: Theft of R12 million has been added to the civil action brought by the family of artist Dumile Feni against Monna Mokoena of Gallery Momo as a foundry in Mpumalanga reveals suspicious sculpture moulds produced without Feni’s daughter’s knowledge. Painful to be a pupil: A school in the Eastern Cape is made up mainly of shacks, which include corrugated iron sheets and planks. The windows and doors are broken and floor is ruined and consists of sand and dust New IFP leader’s tough mission: As his top priority, Velenkosini Hlabisa says he wants to bring unity back to the party. Fewer bucket toilets, but rise in indigents: The influx of people to informal settlements remains a constant battle for municipalities wishing to eradicate a legacy of apartheid – the bucket system. ‘We will kill each other for water’: Residents are growing desperate in the drought-stricken Eastern Cape 