For the first time since SABC television broadcasts began in the 1970s, it seems that one of the country’s oldest and most iconic sports events, the Comrades Marathon, will not be shown live when the race gets under way on Sunday, June 9. This is after the SABC and Athletics SA (ASA) failed to reach an agreement at a crucial meeting in Auckland Park on Thursday afternoon. Sources close to the negotiations say that money is the problem, with the SABC fighting off bankruptcy and ASA alleged to be unwilling to budge – despite the Comrades Marathon Association (CMA), like the Two Oceans Marathon organisers last week, being willing to make a deal to ensure that its events are broadcast. But the Two Oceans was not on TV and, say insiders, nor will the Comrades be. Instead, sources say, the SABC was sent legal letters by lawyers representing ASA, instructing the broadcaster that it may not negotiate directly with athletics event owners. The SABC, say the sources, offered R550 000 for the Comrades and R3 million towards the production costs of the broadcast. ASA rejected the offer. ASA, say sources, is demanding R40 million in a multiyear package deal from the broadcaster, made up of licence rights and production costs, to cover the Comrades, the Cape Town Marathon, the Soweto Marathon, in-season junior and senior athletics events on weekends and a magazine show. The SABC offered R3.3 million (in addition to the R25 million production costs it will put up) but ASA wants R14 million annually for the package. The athletics body is not willing to unbundle the events and negotiate each race separately. Sources say the SABC tried several approaches, including offers of airtime, a trade exchange, a split on sponsorships raised and a non-exclusive deal. But ASA, they say, was clear that the SABC’s financial crisis was not its problem. Approached for comment about pay-TV potentially picking up the Comrades broadcast, SuperSport spokesperson Clinton van der Berg said: “We are not negotiating and we do not intend to either.” Although the SABC’s executive is still to reach a final decision, it looks as if a blackout of the Comrades is on the cards – which will hurt athletics in South Africa. RESPONSES ASA’s chief executive, Richard Stander, told City Press: “It’s not us who are going to stop it [from being on TV], it’s the SABC. We said we cannot accept the offer because it was an embarrassment. ASA will consider the same offer as last year. That was our departure point. “And we said that we will consider it for one year and during this year, we will use the year to negotiate a package that is favourable and fair to both. “A week before the Two Oceans, they offered us R3.5 million for three years. In other words, about R1.3 million a year, coming down from an offer that was tenfold that. “My interpretation is that [they thought] we were in trouble and that we would take any offer, so they deliberately gave us that weak offer, with the Two Oceans just ahead of us. We refused.” Stander added that ASA was within its rights to reprimand the Two Oceans organisers for talking directly to the SABC, arguing that it was in violation of the athletics governing body’s constitution. He said race organisers make their money through the “10% race levy, which ASA does not touch, and in turn, ASA holds the exclusive broadcast rights”. The Two Oceans race office, via its communications department, had promised to comment, but had not done so by the time of going to print. SABC spokesperson Vuyo Mthembu said: “The SABC’s negotiations with ASA are ongoing. It is unfortunate that we could not reach an agreement in time for a number of events, namely the Two Oceans – Juniors and Seniors. But we hope to conclude an amicable agreement so that we are still able to cover other events. “ASA has informed the SABC that it holds the TV rights for all events, including Two Oceans. Thus, we are unable to deal directly with the events for any TV rights. The SABC made its offer to ASA based on its current financial situation. The SABC’s financial situation is public knowledge and it would be reckless for the SABC to enter into agreements that are not financially feasible or sustainable.” Keletso Totlhanyo, general manager of the CMA, said: “We look forward to a meeting between the SABC and the association on Monday, to discuss production plans. We are confident that the SABC will ensure that Comrades 2019 is broadcast and that the athletics mother body will serve the road-running fraternity and commit to doing all that it can to secure the television broadcast.” But insiders are not as hopeful. Sport and Recreation Minister Tokozile Xasa has also promised to intervene in an effort to find solutions to the deadlocked talks between the parties. She is expected to meet ASA this week.