A family put their daughter on a bus, expecting her to arrive safely in Johannesburg. But instead the 17-year-old girl was molested by the Intercape bus driver who has since texted her to blame her for losing his job. To make matters worse, the councillor the bus company tasked with counselling the teenager has apparently worsened her trauma, allegedly telling her that “God wants her to forget about what happened to her on the bus and move on with her life”. On December 14, the family from Villiersdorp in the Overberg region of the Western Cape booked a ticket for the teen. She was supposed to have travelled with a friend, but a mix-up in dates meant her friend travelled the following day, and the teen’s ticket couldn’t be changed. The bus was overbooked and the driver allegedly instructed her to sit next to him in his driving booth until a seat became available when other passengers disembarked in Beaufort West. The company’s call centre allegedly asked the driver to get her telephone number so they could ask whether she was comfortable with the arrangement. She provided her number, and gave the call centre the go-ahead because she didn’t want to waste her parents’ money, she said. The mother told City Press her daughter fell asleep in the driver’s booth and awoke to the bus driver fondling her genitals. A struggle ensued as she attempted to push his hand away and the bus swerved across the road. The teenager told her parents she froze from shock before she texted her father to tell him what happened. Her parents immediately called the Intercape call centre to report the incident as well as the Villiersdorp police, who said there was nothing they could do. Now, the mother says, the driver is harassing her daughter with messages blaming her for losing his job. Intercape, which operates across Southern Africa, said the driver resigned during their internal investigation. The mother claims an Intercape official also told her daughter she was “asking for it” because she had given her number to the driver in the first place. A counsellor tasked by the company with counselling the girl has now left her more “withdrawn and depressed and refusing to trust any counsellor”, the mother alleges. “During her session with my daughter she spoke to her about her [being adopted] and encouraged her to find her own family, ‘because we can never love her like our other children’. “She also told her that God wants her to forget about what happened to her on the bus and move on with her life, and that many will admire her for that.” In response to questions, Intercape said: “Pertaining to the sexual assault allegations we can confirm that the driver was suspended, an investigation did take place and during the process the driver resigned with immediate effect. Intercape did, however, advise the alleged victim to open a criminal matter as well, but we do not have any information pertaining to that. "Due to legislation and the privacy of all parties involved, including the alleged victim, we will not divulge any further information on the matter in a public forum. Intercape condemns any form of sexual harassment, assault or abuse in the strongest terms. “The aforementioned alleged acts are a direct cause of man’s sinful nature. No individual or company can be held responsible for the sin that man does. Intercape regrets the incident and would once again encourage any person who finds himself or herself in (sic) unacceptable behaviour to take legal action and lay criminal charges against the perpetrator. We cannot act on behalf of a victim to lay such charges.” Another case of assault involving an Intercape bus driver took place this week, when a woman travelling from Port Elizabeth to Johannesburg was allegedly beaten when she complained that a bag she believed was hers had been damaged. According to her police statement, the woman said she assumed the damaged bag was hers because it was identical to the one she was travelling with, and she told the driver she wanted a new one. But after the broken bag’s owner claimed it, the argument escalated and the driver allegedly accused her of “having an attitude” and not apologising. “I wanted to apologise, but he spoke to me in a rude manner, to which I said: ‘Well f**k you, then,’” the statement reads. “He immediately jumped down from the trailer and grabbed me and started to assault me by hitting me with his fists against the back of my head and neck. There were two men who intervened and stopped him from hitting me further,” she said in her statement. Intercape said: “Regarding the alleged physical assault we can confirm that the matter is under investigation. Intercape sees the allegations in an extremely serious light. The safety of all our passengers has been and will always remain our main concern. Continuous awareness is created among staff regarding the fair treatment and safety of passengers.” They would not confirm whether the driver had been suspended or not. 