Democratic Alliance Gauteng premier candidate, Solly Msimanga promises to establish a spin-off of the Zondo commission of inquiry to investigate allegations of corruption and the “capture of the province” that took place while under the leadership of the ANC. A Provincial Prosecution Authority is what Msimanga has named this spin-off and promised to task “someone with integrity and impeccable reputation in legal matters” to head this commission. Read: Solly Msimanga jumped before he was pushed “Because I believe that there is a lot of state capture in Gauteng our first 100 days in office will be spent instituting a commission of inquiry into the state capture in Gauteng and I want it to be televised and headed by somebody with a serious reputation when it comes to legal matters – someone like uMama uThuli Madonsela, Dikgang Moseneke or Edwin Cameron. “We have corruption that is entrenched into our government, particularly government issued contracts. We will not, when we govern, have MECs who are involved in any type of corrupt activities,” said Msimanga, who referred to allegations that had been raised before the Zondo Commission with regards to the conduct of Minister Nomvula Mokonyane. “Our MECs will not be collecting alcohol and braai packs they will instead be serving the people who will vote for us,” said Msimanga. The DA Gauteng premier was addressing a handful of party supporters, the media and other onlookers who had gathered at Beyers Naude Square to announce his action plan for his first 100 days in office should his party win the looming elections.  Msimanga outlined how he will “make the government more effective and caring, deal with corruption and stimulate the economy to create fair access to jobs”. He said “step one will be to cleanse the province of all the alleged corruption that has festered under the leadership of the ANC”. “We will reintroduce the Scorpions who, unlike the Hawks, had an impeccable conviction rate. We will reinstate them to investigate all the wrongdoing that has happened in the province and clean up the province because corruption is the biggest hindrance to those in power providing our communities with the service delivery they need.” The premier candidate also added that his party will introduce a ministerial handbook that will aid in cutting costs. “Unlike some parties that are willing to spend millions [on] costly inauguration ceremonies, we would rather use that money for ordinary South Africans. Under the DA there will also be no blue lights in this province. If ordinary South Africans are struggling with public transport why should there be among us those with blue lights and those who travel in luxury,” said Msimanga. To tackle the high unemployment currently crippling the province, Msimanga promised to set up a “voluntary year of civil service for matriculants” and the establishment of an “investment promotion agency”. He called on those who lost family members in the Life Esidimeni tragedy to be fully compensated because “some of them have been waiting for too long”. “I will also institute legal measures to force former Health MEC Qedani Mahlangu and senior officials implicated in the tragedy to pay from their own pockets from their role in the matter”.    