A Mozambican convict who is serving a 24-year sentence has unexpectedly become mired in Mpumalanga’s underworld of political assassinations in his bid to get parole. Alberto Mhlanga (43) has met with senior Mpumalanga ANC politician, Andries Gamede, at the Barberton Maximum Prison after asking department of correctional services officials for a chance to offer his apology for stealing his VW Touareg in 2006. Mhlanga was sentenced on a string of vehicle theft and armed robbery charges in 2007. One of those charges involved breaking into gamede’s house at midnight in Secunda in 2006, and stealing the car which was parked in a locked garage. Read: The MEC, his daughter and the R5m in gold The politician and his children were asleep in the house when the incident happened. Mhlanga and his accomplice broke into the house first, went into Gamede’s bedroom where he was asleep and then found the car keys in the lounge. Gamede, who was executive mayor of the Gert Sibande District Municipality and regional ANC chairperson at that time, believes that Mhlanga’s aim was not to steal the car but to assassinate him for politically motivated reasons. Gamede’s car was discovered in Malawi. This story bears similarities to the disappearance of former Govan Mbeki Local Municipality chief finance officer, Joshua Ntshuhle, in 2005. Ntshuhle was investigating and exposing financial irregularities at the Secunda-based municipality and was a key witness in court when he disappeared without trace. Ntshuhle’s vehicle was also found in Malawi. Ntshuhle is one of many killed graft-busters in Mpumalanga whose cases have remained unresolved in the last 15 years or so. Another case is the assassination of City of Mbombela speaker, Jimmy Mohlala, in 2005 – allegedly for his fight against tender corruption in the R1.2-billion Mbombela stadium. Speaking about the incident at his home, Gamede said: “He was sent to kill me, but God and my ancestors protected me that night … it was not my day. Stealing the car was not the aim.” He said that he had since survived seven attempts on his life. Mhlanga denied that his aim was to assassinate Gamede but failed to answer the politician’s questions convincingly. Gamede said he vividly remembered his first encounter with Mhlanga at the Bethal Magistrates’ Court. “This boy recognised me in court and just laughed at me … he made a fool of me,” he said. “I stood up and went to you because you were laughing at me,” Gamede added. Gamede reminded Mhlanga that he did not stand trial for the car theft but a sentence was arranged between his lawyer and the magistrate. The politician said that he was tipped off by an official that a lawyer was sent from Nelspruit to negotiate that Mhlanga should not undergo trial for the offence but admit guilt outside court and get his sentence. “You’re sentenced for a case that didn’t sit in court. Police told me to go because they had done their job. I don’t know what was your sentence. You negotiated your sentence with the magistrate and people from Nelspruit. I don’t know who was your lawyer,” Gamede said. “You agreed to a sentence because that was the plan.” Gamede said this arrangement made him even more suspicious about the vehicle theft. Mhlanga confirmed that a white lawyer came to negotiate his sentence in the magistrate’s office. Mhlanga said that he and an accomplice had taken a taxi from Alexandra to Secunda to steal a car. His partner was shot dead in Pretoria many years ago, he said. Mhlanga said that they waited in a nearby bush until midnight before they went to Gamede’s house. “We broke a kitchen window and entered. We went upstairs and we were scared to find two black people sleeping because we always wanted to steal from white people,” he said. Mhlanga said that they found car keys in the lounge and then took a sound system and a TV set. The TV set, he said, was too big to fit into the car so they left it. Mhlanga said they sold the car to a Mozambican known as “Dreads” for R15 000. Gamede denied that there was a bush next to his house. He said that he was surprised that Mhlanga could pass thousands of houses on his way from the taxi rank but go steal a car that was locked in a garage. “There’s a guest house with many cars outside and my neighbour’s cars were not parked in a garage. Why didn’t you go to steal those cars?” Gamede asked. Gamede also told Mhlanga that he was lying when he said he did not know how to use a gun. “But you were arrested and found with an unlicensed firearm at a roadblock in Johannesburg.” Gamede said that he had collected all the information over the years and had no doubt that Mhlanga was bought to assassinate him. Correctional Services officials agreed with Gamede’s suggestion that Mhlanga should be given a chance to mull over the situation and meet Gamede again when he was ready to tell the whole truth.    