January enjoys pride of place on the ANC’s calendar as the party marks its birthday. The election manifesto launch is added cause for celebration All roads will lead to KwaZulu-Natal this weekend in preparation for the ANC’s January 8 celebrations to mark the party’s 107th birthday, as well as its election manifesto launch, which takes place at Durban’s Moses Mabhida Stadium on January 12. Celebrities, from well-known slay queens to musicians, will be there to play host and perform at a number of parties around these celebrations. Although the ANC is expecting more than 85 000 supporters from nine provinces to attend its election manifesto rally on Saturday, not everyone is going to Durban for the politics. Some see the rally as a business and networking opportunity; others are travelling to the city purely for the entertainment on offer as several parties have been planned for before and after the rally. However, ANC head of elections Fikile Mbalula told City Press on Friday that the parties that had been advertised were not official ANC parties. He confirmed that the ANC had put together a cultural programme and entertainment line-up, but would only be able to confirm the list of performers early this week. For those heading to Durban, the revelry starts on Thursday night at Taboo Pop Up Club and Rich nightclub. A R150 entrance fee will enable you to enjoy the likes of Busiswa, DJ Tira and Shimza. Those who still have the energy to live it up on Friday night can head to Azar Night Club in Morningside for the Gold Party, hosted by well-known slay queens Faith Nketsi and Kim Kholiwe. For a R150 entrance fee, you will see performances by DJ Chynaman, DJ Feel and Benny Maverick. Following Saturday’s manifesto launch, the Endless Summer afterparty takes place at Greyville Racecourse. It is hosted by TV personality Somizi Mhlongo and ticket prices range from R100 to R350. Artists include Kwesta, Busiswa, Shimza, Oskido and deejays Tira, SPHEctacula, Naves, Bongz and PH. If this sounds too noisy and crowded, there are more exclusive events on offer, such as the VVIP Party Experience. Taking place at the new Eyesizwe boutique hotel, situated near Hazelmere Dam just outside the city, the event aims to attract 1 000 business tycoons. Hotel manager Siphosethu Hlomuka said tickets to exclusive lounges were on offer, with packages priced at between R5 000 and R25 000. Events at these venues will be hosted by popular Instagram celebrity Eva Modika and various other celebs. In addition, the hotel is hosting a pre-party and an afterparty. Packages on offer include expensive champagnes such as Dom Perignon, Veuve Clicquot and Moët & Chandon; luxe cognac brands Hennessey and Rémy Martin; Bombay gin; and whiskey aplenty, including aged bottles of Glenmorangie and Glenfiddich. There will also be hubbly bubbly pipes and food platters. Hlomuka said the unique selling point of his hotel’s pre-party and afterparty was that in every lounge a celebrity host would be on hand to entertain guests. “We will be accommodating people who don’t want to go where everyone else is. We are accommodating guests who prefer privacy, yet are willing to spend money.” Hlomuka added that he was not bothered that other parties were happening because his offerings were all about exclusivity and class. TALK TO US Do you think major political rallies should include such lavish parties? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword PARTY and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material