The EFF is turning the heat on President Cyril Ramaphosa: come clean on the alleged ties with corruption accused firm, Bosasa, or face the party’s wrath. EFF leader Julius Malema said on Wednesday during a media briefing that Ramaphosa had until the end of next week to provide a public explanation for the R500 000 that Bosasa contributed to his ANC election campaign last year. He wanted Ramaphosa to conduct an open media briefing and take questions from the media. He also demanded that Ramaphosa produce proof that he had paid back the Bosasa money as he had promised. Otherwise the EFF would use the opening of Parliament later in February to take him to task, Malema said. The EFF gained notoriety for interrupting former president Jacob Zuma’s speech during the opening of Parliament, demanding that he account for the various allegations against him. “If Ramaphosa behaves like Zuma then he will be treated like Zuma,” Malema said. He said the EFF would act against all Constitutional delinquents. He accused Ramaphosa of lying to Parliament when he said last year that his son, Andile, had a business relationship with Bosasa and the money he had received from the firm was based on an existing contractual arrangement. In a later statement Ramaphosa said he had erred in his response and that the funds were used for his ANC presidential campaign, but he had not been alerted so he was unaware of the source. Malema said on Wednesday that the EFF would never allow anyone to “lie before Parliament” and get away with it. “We are giving Ramaphosa an opportunity to explain in a press conference and take questions openly before we go to Parliament.” Bosasa was the focus of the ongoing state capture commission of inquiry, at which a former executive, Angelo Agrizzi, presented testimony that implicated senior ANC politicians, government officials and business people in multiple acts of corruption. Malema said that more companies like Bidvest and Investec, both previously linked to Ramaphosa through business ties, should also be scrutinised before the commission of inquiry just like Bosasa. He also said the ANC was disingenuous in its promise to fight corruption because it was yet to haul Ramaphosa before its integrity committee over Bosasa. The committee was set up to protect the public image and reputation of the ANC by looking into allegations against members and leaders. Malema said the EFF had a productive national list conference over the weekend in Bloemfontein, Free State, where delegates voted for its MP and MPL candidates who would represent the party after the upcoming general elections. He said the national list committee would finalise the list after all candidates had been vetted. The EFF launches its manifesto next weekend in Giant Stadium in Soshanguve, Tshwane.