The last time a South African head of state was the chief guest at India’s Republic Day parade – an occasion as big as Christmas in that country – was in 1995 when Nelson Mandela was just a year into office. Being invited to be that chief guest is a big deal, usually indicating how seriously the country takes you or signalling that it wishes to enter a new phase in the relationship. Back then Mandela was an obvious choice, given the global stature of the head of a newly liberated South Africa. It was a different time in the world. South Africa was the flavour of the moment. India was just another developing country – albeit a very influential member of what was then known as the Non-Aligned Movement. The Commonwealth, an anachronistic association of former UK colonies, was still a powerful force in multilateral affairs and member countries, such as India, had used it as a highly effective tool to isolate and squeeze the apartheid regime before the 1994 democratic breakthrough in South Africa. The Indian National Congress, the party in power, had led India to independence in 1947 and had sibling ties to the ANC. In 1995 the world was unipolar, with the US ruling the roost in the post-Cold War era. China was just emerging as a potential competitor to US hegemony, but those who ruled Washington were confident their emasculation of the Soviet bloc meant their dominance of world affairs would last a thousand years. When President Cyril Ramaphosa paid a state visit to India this week and was the special guest at the Republic Day parade, the world had undergone a major metamorphosis since 1995. The US might still be the world’s biggest economy but second-placed China is as powerful – if not more so – as Uncle Sam on the world stage. Soon it will overtake the US. And Vladimir Putin’s jingoistic Russia has emerged as a more dangerous foe to the US than the communists of yore. On the home front India’s Congress is no longer the dominant force in Indian politics, an insane space in which a plethora of regional and special-interest parties hold Congress and its rival Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) to ransom. The BJP, the primary ideology of which is Hindu nationalism but whose platform is economic liberalisation, is the dominant force. Congress, the ANC’s ally, is a distant second and will be forced to cobble together alliances if it wants to regain power in the elections in June. In the time that has lapsed since Mandela’s 1995 visit, India moved from being just another developing nation to being a major power in its own right. Following two decades of economic liberalisation reforms, begun by the Congress government and accelerated by BJP, the Indian economy is now ranked the sixth-biggest, in GDP terms. The mind-blowing growth rate of 7.5% last year – the fastest of all the world’s major economies – is set to continue this year. India’s target is to be the third-biggest economy by 2022, overtaking Germany and the UK. With economic power has come regional and global power, as well as ambition. India is no longer in China’s shadow and now plays in the same arenas as its neighbour and the Western powers. Part of this is already playing out on the African continent. Whereas other powers have formalised structured relationships, such as the EU Africa Partnership and the China Africa Cooperation, the three-yearly India-Africa Summit has already held its fourth edition. Billions of Indian rupees have been flowing into the continent in the form of fixed investment, trade, grant assistance and credit lines. An extensive Pan African free trade agreement is in the making. The lack of basic infrastructure in much of Africa and the potential for agriculture, industrialisation, as well as exploration for mineral resources has the Indian business and political establishment salivating. “India and Africa will be the dragons of global growth [in the future],” said an academic, adding that with Africa still promising to be the driver of world economic growth in the coming decades, “the Indian government does not want to be left out”. At the centre of this relationship with the continent sits South Africa, sentimentally an old ally, but also a strategic partner on the global stage. “South Africa is one of the most developed countries [in the developing world], with great potential. We share aspirations and similar growth models,” said Suresh Prabhu, the minister of commerce, industry and aviation. One of these aspirations is the democratisation of multilateral institutions, such as the UN. Both South Africa and India are eyeing permanent seats on a reformed UN Security Council. The view from both countries is that their respective histories of waging liberation struggles which culminated in strong constitutions, as well as their rapid post-liberation adoption of democratic values and internationalist outlooks, render them perfect co-travellers in a reconfigured world order. “India and South Africa bring issues of human rights to the core centre of international relations,” said a prominent academic. Lurking in the background watching this bromance is China, which is a lot more aggressive in its pursuit of global influence and has been energetically waving its chequebook around the continent. Complicating matters for South Africa and India is China’s dominant role in the Brics bloc. Although it is a powerful counterweight to the US and the EU, the only common cause the Brics partners have is economic – and even that is skewed in favour of an all-powerful China. On issues of democracy, human rights, sustainable development and climate change, Russia and China give only a polite nod. The bloc has subsumed the Ibsa Dialogue Forum, which brought together India, Brazil and South Africa. Ibsa now gets little priority in the respective members’ agendas and its diminution was helped by corruption-related governance crises in Brazil and South Africa in the past half-decade. There is now a sense that the Ibsa countries should play a more coordinated role within Brics and that the five partners should begin to “rewrite the rules of the game”. A senior public servant said the value of Ibsa was that its member states were “multicultural, pluralistic democracies … so we are trying to see how we reignite” the bloc. This might be a tall order given that a Donald Trump replica has just taken over in Brazil. This is where the South Africa-India relationship will again have to kick in. This week memorandums were signed, deals negotiated, handshakes done and undertakings made. Indications were that India takes South Africa very seriously, despite its much smaller economy and sluggish growth.