India has gone all out to woo President Cyril Ramaphosa for business and trade deals during his first state visit to the country. Ramaphosa and his wife, Tshepo Motsepe, received a warm welcome on Friday, and streets poles in New Delhi were adorned with posters of South Africa’s president. Ramaphosa will be the chief guest at India’s 70th Republic Day celebrations on Saturday, which celebrates the date on which the Constitution of India came into effect. This is the second time a South African president will be the chief guest for the Republic Day celebrations – the first honour went to Nelson Mandela, who was the chief guest in 1995. India is hoping South Africa will sign deals on defence, higher education and minerals. Several Cabinet ministers and a high-powered delegation of businesspeople accompanied the president. The ministers include International Relations and Cooperation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu, Mineral Resources Minister Gwede Mantashe, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan, Communications Minister Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams, Higher Education Minister Naledi Pandor, Energy Minister Jeff Radebe, Tourism Minister Derek Hanekom and Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Minister Senzeni Zokwana. City Press has learnt that only two agreements, which fall under the ambit of science and technology, will be signed today. At the welcoming ceremony held at the presidential palace, the Rashtrapati Bhavan in New Delhi this morning, Ramaphosa was welcomed with an elaborate state reception complete with a 16-gun salute. Ramaphosa inspected a guard of honour mounted by a detachment of Indian air force and navy. Ramaphosa also addressed the media this morning where he emphasised the historic nature of the visit. READ: Ramaphosa concludes charm offensive in Davos before taking on India “It is a real joy and pleasure to be here in India. This is a historic visit for us as South Africans. We are here not only to consolidate the relationship between India and South Africa, but also to remember the great leaders that our two countries have had,” the president said. Ramaphosa described Mandela and Indian icon Mahatma Gandhi as two outstanding leaders who laid down a particular trail to follow and had respect for human rights, freedom and democracy. This was despite the controversy that has surrounded Gandhi, who has been labelled a racist. Last year, students at a university in Ghana removed Gandhi’s statue over suggestions that he was a racist. “We are the inheritors of the great work that they have performed. My coming here to India as the president of South Africa is to celebrate with the people of India. This is a joy for us as South Africans,” Ramaphosa said. He will deliver a Gandhi and Mandela freedom lecture at the Leela hotel later today.