President Cyril Ramaphosa has hinted that 18 sectors and subsectors would be earmarked and prioritised in order to reach a target of five percent economic growth. Ramaphosa, addressing the Business Unity South Africa (Busa) Business Economic Indaba in Midrand on Tuesday, said he has been presented with a list of 18 business sectors and subsectors which could contribute and collaborate with government to grow the economy by at least five percent According to the latest Statistics SA figure, South Africa has only barely been out of its technical recession in the third quarter of last year, when the economy expanded by 2.2 percent after a 0.4 percent contraction the quarter before. “We are open for business, for working together, for collaboration, because the one singular goal is to grow the economy,” Ramaphosa said to a half-full Gallagher Convention centre. “They are beginning to imagine a South Africa that will have a 5% and 7% growth. They are coming up with ideas and they have identified 18 sectors and subsectors where they are saying in each sector how many jobs can be created and how much can be invested. That for me is the holy grail we should all aspire to touch,” he said. Ramaphosa said he was committed to collaborate with business in the various sectors and wants government, in turn, to deal with the barriers that have hindered growth. “They (business) say they want government to deal with the inhibitors (to growth), to deal with what holds this great country back from generating that five percent growth,” he said. Though Ramaphosa only attended the event later in the day, at least eight Cabinet ministers were in attendance throughout the day with five ministers, Rob Davies, Zweli Mkhize, Ebrahim Patel, Tito Mboweni and Pravin Gordhan who participated in a panel discussion alongside Black Management Forum President Andile Nomlala, facilitated by Standard Bank chief executive, Lungisa Fuzile, about future perspectives through collaboration. During that discussion, Nomlala also stated that his organisation wanted outgoing Absa chief executive, Maria Ramos, to be replaced by a black person. In his opening address of the day-long event, Busa President Sipho Pityana said the gathering was against the backdrop of the organisation’s promise to make good on the promises made during last year’s Jobs Summit. “As President Ramaphosa said at the World Economic Forum in Davos, we must all bemoan the fact that South Africa has essentially lost nine years of its life under his predecessor. If we use this opportunity wisely, those years will be a forgotten. While we will never get back the lost years – we must be spurred on, to make up for the lost time, and to ensure that we get our economy, our democracy and our wonderful country back on track,” Pityana said. He also pointed out that transformation remained high on the priority list of business. “The transformation of our economy into an inclusive one is a key imperative for all of us gathered here. There can be no higher priority. This is more so given the prognosis that South Africa’s economic growth will remain tepid this year, with high unemployment and sluggish credit growth, which accounts for roughly two thirds of South Africa’s gross domestic product, will weigh on private consumption. Weak economic growth will act as a headwind to fiscal revenues, thereby limiting the government’s ability to render adequate public services, particularly in the education, health and social welfare areas,” he said.