ANC Youth League (ANCYL) chairperson Kwazi Mshengu has dropped a bombshell, saying the “enemy” wanted them to boo President Cyril Ramaphosa at the ANC’s January statement rally, which takes place at the Moses Mabhida Stadium in Durban on Saturday. The ANC will also use the rally to launch its election manifesto. Mshengu made the remarks during the youth league rally in honour of its former leader Peter Mokaba, held in Catocrest in eThekwini region in KwaZulu-Natal on Wednesday. The rally was attended by Ramaphosa who was flanked by youth league president Collen Maine and ANC KwaZulu-Natal chairperson Sihle Zikakala. “The enemy wants us to boo you Mr President. We will never do that. There will be no member who will disrupt that programme,” Mshengu said, without specifying who the enemy was. KwaZulu-Natal, which is former president Jacob Zuma’s stronghold, is seen as hostile towards Ramaphosa. It supported Minister in the Presidency Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma’s failed bid to be ANC president in 2017. Mshengu said the enemy should not determine the agenda of the ANC. Hundreds of ANC members clad in party t-shirts bearing the face of Ramaphosa attended the rally. They packed the huge white marquee despite the hot KwaZulu-Natal sun. Maine told the crowd that KwaZulu-Natal was the most vibrant province. His speech was almost interrupted as the crowd was noisy as he spoke. He had to tell the crowd to stop making noise more than once. In his speech, Maine said that the youth league was alive but like any other organisation it faced challenges. He said KwaZulu-Natal was the home of the youth league. “This youth league is ready to inherit the ANC,” he added. Zikalala took a swipe at youth league leaders, saying Mokaba never used his position to be elected into the ANC. “The youth league of Peter Mokaba was the voice of the youth in the country. The youth league must engage government even if it means marching against the government,” Zikalala said. Maine said there should not be special treatment for anybody in the ANC. “Corruption is corruption. People must face the law,” he said.