After eight years of trying to develop space weather capabilities at its Hermanus facility, the South African National Space Agency has been selected by the International Civil Aviation Organisation to provide space weather services to the global aviation sector. “We are happy that South Africa continues to lead in areas that previously were not regarded as areas that developing countries could be leading,” said Science and Technology Minister Mmamoloko Kubayi-Ngubane. Space weather storms pose a significant risk to flight safety, affecting communication and navigation systems and onboard avionics, and increased radiation exposure poses a risk to the health of aircraft crew and passengers. “This is a sign of confidence to all our work as the department of science and technology, and the country,” she said. This kind of information was not previously provided to the aviation sector. It has only recently been addressed as an area of importance and is now required to form part of flight plans. “South Africa’s designation as a regional space weather information provider will grow the science, engineering, technology and innovation sector, offering opportunities to develop scarce skills and increase national research output, while ensuring that usable products and services are generated for the safety of the nation,” said Kubayi-Ngubane. Space weather describes events that happen in space, which can disrupt modern technologies such as satellites, GPS, power grids, navigation and communication systems. The Space Agency has been developing space weather services over the past nine years, and currently operates a space weather centre at the facility in Hermanus. This centre was recently upgraded and unveiled by Kubayi-Ngubane. “The agency’s monitoring of the sun and its activity has been providing the country with vital early warnings and forecasts on space weather conditions, and these benefits will now be extended to the international aviation community,” said Kubayi-Ngubane. Over the next few years it will be working closely with the Air Traffic Navigation Service, the South African Weather Service, and the Civil Aviation Authority and other applicable aviation partners to investigate the implications of the International Civil Aviation Organisation recommendation to the African aviation sector. South Africa is the only African country with operational space weather capabilities, and the agency, with the support of the department, will engage with other African countries on data sharing, infrastructure hosting, training, product development, and research collaboration opportunities.