LG Electronics launched its latest flagship smartphone, the V40ThinQ, on Tuesday evening at a swanky dinner at the Agog Gallery in Maboneng. The immediate standout feature is the five cameras – three in the back and two in the front (within the notch) – that LG has positioned as its main selling point. The penta-lens camera is supported with a 6.4-inch OLED display with a QHD+ resolution at 3120 x 1440 pixels, 6GB of RAM and 128GB internal storage expandable by a MicroSD card. The processor sports a Qualcomm Snapdragon 845. The rear-end camera features a wide-angle 16MP 16mm/f1.9, a normal 12MP 27mm/f1.5 and a telephoto lens with 12MP 52mm/f2.4. The two front cameras have a wide-angle 5MP 21mm/f2.2 camera and a standard 8MP 26mm/f1.9 lens. The battery specs come in at 3 300mAh and the device allows both facial recognition and fingerprint scanners (located just below the horizontally placed back-end cameras). The phone also comes with a 3.5mm headphone jack, despite most smartphone manufacturers dropping this recently. The South African version will only be available from February 7 in Moroccan Blue (choice for who) and will be priced at R12 499. For those who prefer contract, Vodacom will be the exclusive carrier, initially, with a R599 a month on the Smart XS+ package. After a quick test run at the Agog Gallery, where a five-course dinner was served – to take as many foodie photos of course – the most impressive feature was its performance on low-lighting and dark scenes. Right off the bat, without even looking at any other features, the first photo taken was this: Not bad at all. Another cool feature is the triple lens viewer, where one can preview a scene from all three cameras and choose which one works best. Alternatively, you can click once and the device takes three photos from its triple lens. Two other features that warrant mentioning within the confines of the camera hub are the social sharing buttons. Once connected to all your social media accounts this slide-out menu located towards the bottom right of the screen easily allows you to share your images with one hand. The second feature that stands out is the cine shot, which allows you to keep a certain element in motion while the rest of the image is static. These two features led LG to the claim that this is the best content creation device yet. And with its easy feel in the hand, weighing in at 169g, this smartphone seems to be a real contender for that title. Look out for the full review in City Press soon. To whet your appetite here are food pics taken with the LG V40 ThinQ:      