The ANC on Tuesday rallied behind its members who are implicated in allegations of corruption, saying they have not been found guilty by a court of law. This came after former Bosasa executive Angelo Agrizzi implicated ANC members including Environmental Affairs Minister Nomvula Mokonyane during his testimony at the Commission of Inquiry into state capture. The ANC’s head of presidency, Zizi Kodwa, said the party would not “run and find somebody guilty”. “We are avoiding running commentary on a testimony that is not corroborated or cross-examined. It undermines the legitimacy of the commission. Those who are implicated must approach the commission and give an alternative version,” Kodwa said at the Luthuli House. The ANC was briefing the media on the outcomes of its national executive committee lekgotla held in Irene, outside Pretoria, over the weekend. ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule said there was no need for those implicated in allegations of corruption to step down. “Please respect the universal principle of innocent until found guilty. Why should someone step down? The commission of is not a court of law. That is why we need to tread carefully. Give the commission time to do its work,” Magashule said. The ANC lekgotla discussed the startling allegations coming out of the Zondo commission, which is investigating allegations of state capture. Magashule reiterated the ANC’s support for the Zondo commission, saying: “The ANC again calls on ANC members and all citizens with information to avail themselves to the commission ... The commission, by virtue of its mandate, will deal with difficult matters, but this inevitable if we want to unearth the truth. The commission in its nature of work must hear all sides, so that when it makes final determinations, it will be a just, thorough and fair outcome,” he said. However, Magashule said the ANC would not be giving running commentary on the work of the commission and would make submissions at an appropriate time. Magashule said the ANC was moving on with implementation of the national conference resolutions. This include pursuing “flexible monetary policy regime” on the the SA Reserve Bank. “We will be implementing that resolution,” Magashule said.