Can we please get real now. Summer bodies are created ALL YEAR ROUND and Red Bull SA kicked off the new year’s reminder of this by inviting media people and fitness enthusiasts to a 45-minute spinning session. The event, hosted by Instagram fitness sensation Mapule Ndhlovu (@queenfitnass), had DJ Lady Lea on the decks and triathlon athlete Natasha Gorrie, who has been in the game for 20 years, giving instruction. The session was, as the kids say, lit. And this one was literally lit, because all the exercise bikes were fitted with LED lights that gave the studio in GO Health Club in Fairlands a life of its own. The colour display by the bikes was so cool, as the lights changed colour with varying pedalling intensity.  Usually I get sent most, if not all, of the fitness gathering invites. Again I noticed that not many gents attend these gatherings. In this session I only saw two guys taking part in the spinning. But I don’t think all the ladies present had fun like I did. For example, the lady who was next to me. I honestly did not see much movement from her side. The session, like all spinning sessions, did get intense. But hey, I believe one should always exercise at one’s own pace. Another day more sweating #redbullza #givesyouwings A post shared by  MohauMokoena (@mohard85) on Jan 24, 2019 at 12:16am PST  The session was based on high intensity interval training (HIIT). This means that for 20 or 30 seconds you go as hard as you possibly can, and then cool off for the next 10 seconds, without stopping. Water and Red Bull was handed around the studio, but as Queenfitnass mentioned: “Red Bull is a function drink. You can’t drink it all the time, but when I need to function at top level in a fitness routine it is the way to go.”   I was thankful for the water more than for the beverage. Thing is, I have a not-so-great past relationship with energy drinks. But my relationship with exercise, on the other hand, is great. So this event was really welcome, although I was not blown away by the post- and pre-workout food.   We had some scrambled egg wraps, health bread with nut butter and a serving of chia seeds (I think) with some fruit bits. Lots of fruit (hint, hint: chunks of pineapple) is really the way to my heart. But overall I most def would go back for more spinning. 