India is an important destination for South African exports. “There remain many unexplored opportunities that can propel us a better tomorrow. South Africa and India have complementarities and comparative advantages that can be exploited for mutual benefit,” President Cyril Ramaphosa said while addressing the South Africa-India Business Forum in New Delhi yesterday. Ramaphosa’s first state visit to India was a busy one as he had to deliver the inaugural Gandhi-Mandela Memorial Freedom Lecture in honour of former president Nelson Mandela and Indian icon Mahatma Gandhi, as well as address the business forum. The president noted that there had been steady increase in trade between South Africa and India, from R80 billion to R107 billion over the five years between 2013 and 2017. “This progress is the result of the broadening of economic space for bilateral trade and our strategic cooperation in forums such as Brics. I welcome the current initiatives by our respective ministers of trade to increase trade and to explore sector-specific collaboration to boost our manufacturing and trade relations, with an emphasis on increasing trade in value-added goods and services. Ramaphosa said South Africa’s investment relationship with India has also deepened, with more than 150 Indian firms operating in the country. Following official talks between the two governments, South Africa and India signed a three-year programme of cooperation aimed at enhancing the strategic partnership. South Africa’s ambassador to Brics, Anil Sooklal, said some of the key sectors that are outlined in the three-year strategic programme of action include agriculture and agroprocessing, mining, ocean economy, as well as cooperation in science and technology. “This is what we speak about. India is a massive country with massive needs. It is a market for us,” he said. Prime Minister of India Narendra Modi told attendees at the business forum that the bond between the two nations is deeper than many realise. “We remain steadfast in our commitment for closer cooperation between two old friends. We are on our way to becoming the fifth largest economy globally,” Modi said. Although Gandhi has been accused of being a racis tby some, Ramaphosa described him and Mandela as two great leaders who wanted to see a world that is free of racial discrimination. “They serve as beacons of hope for many who continue to suffer race and injustices. For Mandela, Gandhi was an inspiration and a role model.”