Eight men were handed life sentences at the South Gauteng High Court on Thursday for racketeering following a string of bank robberies in the Gauteng and Mpumalanga provinces. Appearing before Judge Moses Mavundla, eight men between the ages of 38 and 48 were sentenced to life in prison for the string of robberies they carried out between the years 2013 and 2014. Sikhumbuzo Sibanda (45), Strike Ndebele (40), Mduduzi Makhubu (38), Themba Ndlovu (45), Xolani Nxumalo (44), Bafana Ntuli (48), Nkosana Nkomo (44) and Lucky Dube (42) were found guilty of contravening section 2(1) (d) of the Prevention of Organised Crime Act 121 of 1998. According to Mavundla, the offenders were guilty of violating this act, which was introduced in an effort to combat various crimes including organised crime, money laundering and criminal gang activities. According to the act, the offenders were guilty of acquiring and maintaining control of an enterprise through a pattern of racketeering [continuously or repeatedly earning illegal money through acts such as robberies]. “My decision on the sentencing was based on aggravating circumstances [factors that increase the severity of the crime]. The [repetition] of the crimes demonstrates that the offenders had no regard for the law. There wasn’t just one robbery, but many, over a long period,” he said. “The offenders had firearms and used them in incidents where police or security guards approached them and this resulted in the injury of one such official.”Spokesperson for the Hawks in Gauteng, captain Ndivhuwo Mulamu told City Press that a task team was formed by her unit after a visible spike in bank robberies in the years 2013 and 2014. “This was a major investigation for us because we received a request for assistance from the South African Police Services with investigating various cases of bank robberies. They had realised that the same tactics were being used in different robberies, so we decided to investigate them as one major case,” she said. The Hawks said that this was a syndicate. “The first group of suspects, some of whom were convicted were arrested inside a bank in KwaZulu-Natal while committing a crime of armed robbery. The police there contacted us and told us they had offenders in custody and they fit the description of the individuals we were looking for in connection with bank robberies,” the Hawks said. “We then conducted facial and fingerprint comparisons and various other investigation methods were done and we concluded that they were the people we were looking for. We charged them with bank robbery.” With a total amount of more than R1 million stolen, some of the financial institutions that were targeted included Bidvest Banks in Witbank and Vanderbijlpark, Absa Bank in Sandton and a Standard Bank in Balfour Park. According to the Hawks, the largest amount stolen in one robbery was more than R500 000. “On September 19 2013 the FX Africa Bank in Balfour Park was robbed. So far, in relation to the case that we heard today, that was where the highest amount was stolen from by them,” the Hawks said. South African Bank Risk Information Centre forensic specialist, Marsel van der Merwe, said that between the period January 1 2012 and December 31 2016, a total of 63 bank robberies were reported nationally. “The total cash loss from bank robberies during the period amounted to more than R18 million. Gauteng reported the highest cash loss with more than R7.5 million followed by Mpumalanga with an amount of over R4.5 million,” he said. Van der Merwe explained that robberies in this instance referred to the removal or an attempt to remove cash while it was under the control of a bank by means of violence. “From 2015, we have seen a decrease in the number of bank robberies,” he said. Although sentenced to life for contravening the organised crime act, the offenders were also found guilty for various other crimes including attempted murder, illegal possession of firearms, possession of live ammunition and malicious destruction of property. Sibanda was also charged with more than 15 other counts which included more than 50 years for armed robbery, more than 16 years for attempted murder and six years for malicious damage to property. In totality, the more than 15 counts against him, over and above the life sentence handed down to him added up to more than 100 years behind bars. According to the Hawks, other suspects involved in the robberies were yet to be captured. “There are about 15 others involved in this syndicate and we are still working hard to find and arrest them.” The offenders will be held at the Johannesburg Correctional Centre.