President Cyril Ramaphosa spent a busy few days in Switzerland, assuring the international community and potential investors that South Africa is on a path of renewal and growth as the country strengthens partnerships and collaboration domestically and internationally for inclusive economic growth and development. Ramaphosa led the participation of Team South Africa comprising government, business and labour to the World Economic Forum in Davos, where he pulled out all the stops to allay investor fears on topics including land expropriation and nationalisation of the Reserve Bank. Ramaphosa said that the land issue has ceased to be the ugly ogre that some portray it as. He also assured delegates that “investors have been relaxed when land reform is explained to them”. Ramaphosa also pledged that his government would not interfere with the independence of the Reserve Bank, despite a proposal by the ruling party to broaden its focus to boost employment and economic growth. “We do not seek to interfere with its independence,” Ramaphosa told a news conference in Davos. The central bank’s mandate is currently focused on price stability, but the ANC said in its 2019 election manifesto that monetary policy should also “take into account other objectives, such as employment creation and economic growth”. The 2019 deliberations among global leaders in government, business and civil society focused on the theme Globalisation 4.0: Shaping a Global Architecture in the Age of the Fourth Industrial Revolution. “The annual meeting of the World Economic Forum was a platform for South Africa to contribute to global debates and to help shape responses to challenges in the global economy, while presenting South Africa as an investment destination, trade partner and advocate of multilateralism that is undergoing a process of renewal and growth,” Ramaphosa’s spokesperson, Khusela Diko, said. “President Ramaphosa participated in various high-level discussions and held discussions with global leaders of government and the corporate sector. President Ramaphosa and Team South Africa drew international attention to the turnaround unfolding in South Africa after nearly a decade of economic stagnation and political paralysis. A central element of the turnaround is the pursuit of higher levels of domestic and international investment, especially in key industrial sectors and technology, and the skilling of the labour force for the demands of the digital economy.” Ramaphosa noted that the government had: Ramaphosa commented on the Commission of Inquiry into State Capture, saying that it was unearthing important information about the nature and extent of state capture. This would assist South Africa in ensuring that nothing of this nature was allowed to happen again and that those responsible were held accountable, he said. In line with the economic forum’s 2019 theme, Ramaphosa said that there was an opportunity to harness the power of innovation to transform the South African economy in the Fourth Industrial Revolution. “Given the country’s medium level of economic sophistication and diversification, there is wide scope for adapting foreign technologies and turning private research and development into a more powerful driver of corporate profitability and economic growth. We are implementing reforms to increase investment in mobile and fixed broadband infrastructure, through strengthening competition among internet service providers, and improving the quality and reducing the price of ICT services.” Diko said that plans were in place for the government and social partners to reflect on the forum’s deliberations and identify the opportunities the country can pursue and the challenges it has to address. Ramaphosa concluded his working visit to Switzerland on Thursday. From there he made his way to India where Prime Minister Narendra Modi has honoured him as chief guest for India’s 70th Republic Day celebrations which will take place this coming weekend. “The visit will also entail focused engagements on the strengthening of relations between South Africa and India in a broad range of sectors involving cooperation between the two governments and between the private sectors in the two Brics member states,” Diko said. – Additional reporting by Reuters