It is that time of the year when some people just want to wind down – but others want to party. Amapiano dominated this year as it was the fastest-growing electronic genre in the country. Amapiano has been described as a fusion of gqom, deep House and jazz – all underlined by piano/synth lines. Here is a holiday playlist that will keep the party going and send your guests to thedance floor: Umshove Kabza De Small and his partner in crime DJ Maphorisa – The Scorpion Kings – have been hard at work so it isn’t any wonder they’re dominating the Amapiano scene. The pouncing cat pair has led the pack with the release of their highly anticipated album, The Return of the Scorpion Kings. Spotify – a digital music service – said Amapiano sensation Kabza was recently announced as South Africa’s most-streamed artist of the year. This week Kabza told City Press that this year has been the best year of his career. “I am living my dream. I’ve rubbed shoulders with legends who I never thought I would meet.” When asked what the secret was behind his successful music, he said: “It’s simple, you need to love your craft first and, secondly, you should understand what your audience wants at all times. Understanding the latest trends on the street helps a lot; it’s key for a successful music career.” Labantwana Ama Uber This single was met with criticism because many believe it promotes drug abuse and it’s vulgar. The song is performed by Semi Tee, Miano and Kammu Dee. Semi Tee, real name Tumelo Ramaila (20) from Orlando West in Soweto, told City Press that their aim was to encourage people to stop doing drugs. “Growing up ekasi we’ve seen young people’s dreams being shattered because of drug abuse. One day the three of us were sitting and we thought about a song that would educate our peers about drugs and that’s how it was born.” He said they had compared drugs to Uber because Uber is accessible everywhere and the same applies to drugs. Shesha Other notable feats achieved in the year of the Amapiano include De Mthuda & Njelic’s Shesha, which received wide acclaim. It is an infectious song citing the emotional pleas of a man begging his lover to hurry and get ready for a party where they will meet up with his friends and their lovers. Simple but also memorable and catchy. Sukendleleni Jobe London, Mphow69 and Kamo “Manje” Mphela are the trio behind this popular tune that has had many loosening up and tapping their twinkle toes. Kamo gained popularity for her electrifying dance moves and hit songs, such as Lebanta. However, Sukendleleni struck an unpopular note with many for its vulgar lyrics. Kokota This is a song by KayGee DaKing, featuring Bizizi and KillerKau. Kokota is the perfect salutation to the summertime and helps us to wave goodbye to the woes of this year. With catchy, repetitive phrases such as “Hello, Hello, Hello, Hello, San’bonani”, it isn’t a surprise it has received positive feedback. Umlilo DJ Zinhle’s fans have declared her latest single, Umlilo, as the song of the year. The song, featuring vocalist Rethabile and Muzzle, was certified multi-platinum for getting more than 5.1 million streams at Universal’s Night For the Stars – an event honouring artists who have done well. Fetch your Life In this song about triumph, the award-winning Prince Kaybee features Msaki, whose her sweet-sounding voice makes this song even more attractive. She doesn’t try too hard – you just want to sit down and listen to her sing. The song encourages listeners to be resilient and not to give up, spreading a message of hope. Jerusalem Master KG is at it again with the smash hit, Jerusalem. Last year Master KG’s song, Skeleton Move, won SABC Summer Song of the Year. Although Jerusalem sounds like a gospel song, it’s really a catchy song for the festive season. 