What you can expect in your City Press newspaper today: Hate speech must ‘incite violence’: The Supreme Court of Appeal declared the controversial definition of hate speech unconstitutional by finding that a comment is only hate speech if it causes harm as well as incites violence. The ruling will have far-reaching consequences. Behind Enhle and Black Coffee’s divorce: Amid allegations of infidelity and fathering kids out of wedlock, Black Coffee says he has done everything but has accepted that the marriage cannot be saved. Where will the water come from?: While commending Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu on the national water and sanitation master plan, Professor Anthony Turton of the University of the Free State’s centre for environmental management, said it still did not answer one important question: Where will the water come from? ANC says No! No! No! to anger classes: Mpumalanga ANC provincial and regional executive committee members will not heed the recommendation of the national disciplinary committee that they attend anger management classes. Tshwane mayor’s ally bites the dust: The ill-fated alliance of Tshwane mayor Stevens Mokgalapa and Sheila Senkubuge, the member of mayoral committee for roads and transport, came crashing down this week after the DA’s federal legal commission opened an investigation into him and she resigned on Friday after allegations that she was not a South African citizen when the DA included her on its 2016 local elections councillor list. Outrage over return of “abusive” principal: They were forced to eat rotten food for failing to stick to hostel rules, alleged a wheelchair-bound pupil at a Johannesburg school for physically disabled children. His submission against a principal at Hope School, who abdicated two years ago, was sent to the education department in December 2016. The principal left a year later, in 2017, but now education authorities plan to return her to the school tomorrow. Pretoria mum faces charge of rape: The 37-year-old allegedly performed oral sex on one boy and exposed all the boys, aged 13 and 14, to pornography and sent them nude pictures of herself. Magaqa whistle-blower cries foul over lack of support: The ball is once again in the police’s court to provide support and protection to a whistle-blower who survived a shooting in KwaZulu-Natal in October – after he has repeatedly pleaded for this. Bongo under pressure to step down: Members of the ANC Veterans’ League have now been joined by the integrity commission in their call for Bongani Bongo to step aside, following his appearance at the Cape Town Magistrates’ Court last week on charges of corruption. Self-confessed killer gets bail: In the week that President Cyril Ramaphosa, when launching the 16 Days of Activism campaign, said perpetrators should not be granted bail, the family of a slain woman from Mthatha in the Eastern Cape has questioned why her killer was roaming the streets after being granted R3 000 bail. Correctional officer exonerated for supporting Agrizzi: The department of correctional services stated in an employee’s disciplinary hearing that the testimony by former Bosasa chief operating officer Angelo Agrizzi before the state capture commission do not amount to evidence of any wrongdoing until it was tested. From car boot CD selling to Mafikizolo and a Mbokodo: In 2013, singer and songwriter Msaki used to sell her music from the boot of her car. “I managed to sell 500 copies of my CD. It was a big deal,” says the bubbly Msaki. Act fast to save kids lives: A small study of African infants infected with HIV found that treating them with powerful drugs within the first hours and days after birth helped preserve their immune systems, improving their chances of better long-term health, US researchers said this week. ANC on verge of regaining Gauteng metros: The ANC will be walking into to the election for the new Johannesburg mayor on Wednesday with confidence as it has managed to woo the IFP into a coalition and is now fighting to snatch Tshwane from the DA. The pain of the chase: A small Nissan NP200 bakkie is all that North West police’s tactical response team has to use to chase criminals in high-speed vehicles. This while their colleagues in the Flying Squad are forced to share a Mazda 3 and a Ford Ranger double cab to patrol the long stretches of road leading to the provincial capital, Mahikeng. Stats SA teeters on the brink of disaster: Stats SA, which is responsible for collecting and interpreting all the data that South Africa’s economy requires to thrive, is headed for “destruction”, warns Pali Lehohla, who was the country’s Statistician-General from 2000 to 2017. . Get your copy of City Press today for more on these and other stories.