The National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) is looking for a top South African executive in the construction sector, understood to be in Britain, to stand trial in connection with the alleged looting of hundreds of millions of rands from Eskom. The prosecution may also be extended to two JSE-listed companies. Thursday’s dramatic arrest of France Hlakudi (48), Eskom’s former contract manager at the beleaguered Kusile power station; Abram Masango (51), who served on Eskom’s executive committee as head of group capital; and two businessmen, is understood to be just the tip of the iceberg. A warrant has already been issued for the arrest of Mike Lomas (72), former CEO of Group Five, who is understood to be in Britain. In addition, two listed companies – Stefanutti Stocks and Esor Construction – have already begun warding off allegations that they also paid bribes to one of the accused in the case. This week’s arrests come in the wake of an apparent fraud plot revealed by City Press’ sister publication, Rapport, in 2017. In a shock development in 2015, the Tubular group of companies managed to snatch part of a contract for the erection of condensers at Kusile from the international power company, Alstom. On the same day that the contract was awarded to Tubular, Tony Trindade (64), a director of Tubular and one of the accused in the current case, is alleged to have arranged payment of R400 000 to Hlakudi. This money was paid to Hlakudi Translation and Interpretation, of which Hlakudi is the sole director. The language services company is apparently so dynamic that it issued invoices, seen by Rapport, to Tubular for anything from translating marketing material to organising overseas trips and metal plates. The state is alleging that Trindade and Lomas channelled R69 million altogether to Hlakudi and Masango, much of it in the form of hard cash. In 2017, Eskom strongly denied to Rapport that it acted against its own legal advice by kicking Alstom out in favour of Tubular. But in the charge sheet, served this week on the accused, the state is alleging that Hlakudi and Masango misled the Eskom bid adjudication committee by representing that the legal department had given the go-ahead for the deal. According to the charge sheet, on June 23 2015 – the day after the bid adjudication committee approved the transaction – Gabriela Palacious-Flack, Eskom’s chief legal adviser at the time, sent Hlakudi an email expressing her shock about the alleged manner in which the committee had been misled. Another accused in the matter is Hudson Kgomoeswana (46), the sole director of BK Babinatlou Business Service. A similar approach was followed to that used in relation to Hlakudi Translation and Interpretation. According to the charge sheet, BK Babinatlou channelled R74 million to Hlakudi and other parties. Listed construction companies have been placed in a similar uncomfortable situation, although they have not been charged. Esor earlier admitted to the Daily Maverick that it had paid R20 million to BK Babinatlou, but said it was unaware of any connection between BK Babinatlou and Eskom officials. The money was meant to assist schools, said Esor, which is currently in business rescue. Esor said it was under the impression that this was what the funds were used for. In an announcement to shareholders, Stefanutti Stocks said it paid R2 million to BK Babinatlou for improvements at Mokhine High School in Sekhukhune, Limpopo – and that, as far as it could tell, this was what the money was used for. Stefanutti added that it was unaware of any untoward dealings between BK Babinatlou and Eskom officials. All four men arrested this week were released on bail of R300 000 each by the Specialised Commercial Crimes Court in Palm Ridge, Gauteng. The four accused, along with the missing Lomas and seven business entities involved in the matter, stand accused of 95 charges of fraud, corruption and money laundering. The case has been postponed to May 25, so that Lomas can be located and for the matter to be transferred to the high court.  City Press