What you can expect in your City Press newspaper today: How SAA avoided a crash-landingNational carrier SAA was just hours away from total collapse when the decision was taken to place it into business rescue. With funds depleted and liquidation looming, business rescue was the airline’s eleventh-hour lifeline.Sisulu faces backlash over water master planWater and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu is facing resistance to her ambitious water “master plan” as some of her Cabinet colleagues and chunks of the ANC parliamentary caucus say it was “rushed” and publicly launched without adequate consultation. Julius Malema relishes cases piled against him “A blessing in disguise” and a “positive addition to my political itinerary”. This is how EFF leader Julius Malema has described the concerted effort by lobby group AfriForum to have him prosecuted by the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA). Mohlala fights multiple fires Controversial SABC board member Mamodupi Mohlala, who is also the chief executive officer (CEO) of the Estate Agency Affairs Board (EAAB), is facing battles on multiple fronts, with her colleagues, the public broadcaster, government and her staff raising questions about her conduct. Which celeb owned 2019? The first name that comes to mind when we reflect on which celebrity-owned this year is media personality Boitumelo “Boity” Thulo. The 29-year-old rapper travelled to all the corners of the world, bought herself a luxury space grey SUV valued at R2.5 million, surprised her mother with a brand-new Mercedes-Benz worth R1 million as a birthday gift, her single – Wuz Dat – went platinum, with more than two million streams, and she is working on a music documentary set to be released next year. Public Protector should be no friend with politicians – Malunga As Kevin Malunga wraps up his last month as Deputy Public Protector, he has sent a stern warning to his successor to avoid becoming too familiar with individuals who could compromise their credibility, saying that “conflict of interest is one thing that keeps coming up in our line of work”. Festive songs to dance to It is that time of the year when some people just want to wind down – but others want to party. Here is a holiday playlist that will keep the party going and send your guests to the dance floor. Mpumalanga leads in sex worker murders National sex workers’ movement Sisonke has joined forces with the Sex Workers’ Education and Advocacy Taskforce to escalate the call to end violence against sex workers in South Africa. She never would have imagined her life ending like this Gomolemo Legae dreamt big, she dreamt of fame and a rap collaboration with Cassper Nyovest, and her family knows that making news headlines as a gender-based violence statistic never crossed the teenager’s mind. Expropriation Bill still divides parliamentary committee Parliament’s ad hoc committee established to oversee the process of amending the Constitution – specifically the Bill of Rights – remained divided this week even as the draft of the bill which will be gazetted this week was being finalised. SACP-ANC alliance a recurring dilemma The special SA Communist Party (SACP) conference that starts tomorrow will again debate the recurring question of whether it should sever ties with the ANC to contest elections alone. Botswana hanging by a thread but could tip over and cause mayhem A once stable political system of Botswana is hanging precariously and will tip over and cause chaos and mayhem, if not properly handled. This was a warning from Advocate Duma Boko, leader of the Umbrella for Democratic Change (UDC). A chilling account of Anele’s death Fritz Joubert first tried to hang Anele Hoyana’s three-week-old baby with a rope and put him [Anele] and his three-year-old toddler in a bathtub before they were rescued by the police. Hobosexuals – what is a hobosexual? They are a new trend in town, whereby people enter into relationships to have shelter and other short-term goals.