What you can expect in your City Press newspaper this week: Sisulu’s battle for control Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation Minister Lindiwe Sisulu’s instruction that the communications budget be “centralised” in her office has raised eyebrows among disgruntled senior managers who are suspicious that the intention is to use public money to fund her future political ambitions in the ANC. SAA flat broke, but can be saved South African Airways is so bankrupt that its creditors may well end up having to pay in, if it goes into liquidation. The wasted Zuma years Businessman Sandile Zungu aptly summed up the Jacob Zuma years when he described an abortive deal that he was involved in with the Gupta family back in 2010. This controversial deal was the introduction for most South Africans to the Guptas, the royal family that would lord it over South Africa for as long as Zuma was in power. Rite of passage is laced with tragedy While hundreds of families in the Eastern Cape are preparing for their sons’ return from initiation schools, 25 others are preparing to bury their beloved offspring. Decade evolution of sex Gone are the days when we had sex for the sole purpose of reproductive success. Sex-positive folk are standing their ground and fighting for the sexual rights and pleasures of women at a time when sexual assault is rife, and some reproductive laws are still in favour of men. A decade that heralded mounting action against gender-based violence In 2010, V-Day, a movement started by Eve Ensler to end violence against women and girls, hosted 5 400 events in 1 500 locations globally. In 2012, along with the V-Day movement, Ensler created One Billion Rising, a global protest campaign to end violence against women and to promote justice and gender equality for women. Red berets have a new marshall “I am the elected secretary-general of the EFF. My responsibility is to do the work of the party, so the position that I am in now is determined by the EFF. This is exactly what [party president Julius Malema] was talking about [when he said] we must never be tempted to use EFF positions for self-promotion – because once I start speaking about my private life ... that would be self-promotion,” says the EFF’s Marshall Dlamini. Necsa fights off Mantashe’s tentacles A mysterious letter, which states that Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy Gwede Mantashe has removed the mandatory powers of the board at the Nuclear Energy Corporation of SA (Necsa), landed on the desk of the company’s acting chief executive, Ayanda Myoli, at the end of last month. Councillor called a ‘lowlife cockroach’ The skirmish for control of the biggest metropolitan councils has resulted in the DA losing control of all three. And things got worse when a Johannesburg DA councillor allegedly received death threats and was called a “lowlife cockroach” for voting in support of the ANC. Musical trends of the decade In music years, 10 years feels like forever. This is because of an oxymoron that exists in reality. Time seems to expand because the trends in music are becoming shorter and shorter. How we watch TV 10 years on If you had asked what South African television would look like at the beginning of this decade, I would have told you: A new dawn is upon us and the future looks amazing. The optimistic, or naive, entertainment commentator in me would have had every reason to be optimistic, writes Phil Mphela. Watcha say? Words, words, words, and how they facilitate the expression of our culture and trends. A selection of new words that have become part of our vocabulary during the past decade. Apocalypse now? From climate change to climate crisis “It is the people who must save the environment. It is the people who must make their leaders change. And we cannot be intimidated. So, we must stand up for what we believe in,” says Wangari Maathai. Food trends What were the most delicious and disgusting food trends in SA for the period 2010 to 2019? There is a tendency to think that taste trends are a topic for glossy food magazines and the epicurean elite who buy them. As a result, these trends are often out of touch with what ordinary people actually shop for, grow, cook, serve and eat on a daily basis. Last minute Christmas treats Are you still indecisive about whether you want to spend your festive season at home or outdoors? Well, here are few affordable entertainment venues that you could visit with your loved ones.