Here are some of the headlines in your City Press newspaper today: Julius Malema opens up on EFF problems EFF leader Julius Malema has laid bare some of the weaknesses of his party, saying that they are a hindrance to the EFF’s electoral growth. Malema was tabling his political report before the party’s second national elective conference – referred to by the party as the national people’s assembly – which kicked off in Johannesburg yesterday. R500 000 “ghost staff” tender award under investigation A company linked to a former employee of the Eastern Cape education department was awarded a contract – estimated to be worth about R500 000 – after she submitted a proposal which led to the company being awarded the tender. As a nyatsi I can’t mess with the rules  “He was my dream man. He was tall, dark and handsome. He stole my heart. On our second date he surprised me with white roses wrapped in R100 notes and a sterling silver engagement ring. He knelt down and proposed,” she remembers. SACP backs Blade’s stay in government The dual role of SACP general secretary Blade Nzimande as the leader of the party and a minister in government was again endorsed by delegates at the special national congress this week, despite mutterings that he should be stationed at headquarters full time in order to ensure the wellbeing of the party. Battling to end albinism prejudice She was raped three times – first when she was only six-years-old, then at age eight and again when she was 12 – all this while she was in the care of close relatives. Now 42, the woman recalled that one of her alleged rapists poured hot tea on her in an attempt to cleanse her of his semen. Cyril Ramaphosa’s critics question adherence to ANC policies The policy posture of President Cyril Ramaphosa’s sixth administration came under fire from delegates attending the SACP’s special national congress, held this week, who warned that government might be “taking a shift to the right”. Spy chief faces uncertainty Advocate Mahlodi Muofhe’s term of office as the head of the domestic branch of intelligence in the State Security Agency (SSA) expires in March next year and this has set tongues wagging on whether or not President Cyril Ramaphosa would retain him. Payback A company which was awarded more than R200 million in contracts by Transnet – and which also paid a deposit for the home of one of the parastatal’s top executives – has been ordered to repay all profit it made from the deals. “We kill them in just eight days” A total of 788 young men have lost their lives since 2006 during the rites of passage initiation process in the Eastern Cape. A further 317 boys had their private parts amputated during the same period. Yet the authorities are failing to stem the death spiral. Death stalks mining community after peacemaker’s assassination Meshack Mbuyazi had just emerged from a peace-broking meeting which had also been attended by KwaZulu-Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala in Kwambonambi when he was gunned down in full view of community members this week. The fairest, fiercest of them all Werner Wessels, creative consultant for Miss SA, had no doubt that Zozibini Tunzi would be crowned Miss Universe because “South African women have so much to say and give to the world”. Gambling Board rigged The North West Gambling Board allegedly paid its chairperson R7 350 to enjoy a golf tournament and a luxurious two-night stay at The Palace of the Lost City, situated at the Sun City Resort in Rustenburg. This is one of the potentially fraudulent claims made against board members as part of corruption allegations associated with the gambling regulator. Mkhwebane rails against judges Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane has defended her censure of judges, saying no one must be muzzled or stopped from expressing their views about court decisions. Zozi’s mum beans with pride As a child, Zozibini Tunzi was incredibly shy. “She lived in her own cocoon and didn’t want to play outside. She seldom left the house and I realised I had to do something to give my child more self-confidence,” her mother, Philiswa Tunzi, said this week.  City Press  