Advocate Kholeka Gcaleka has emerged from Parliament’s baptism of fire as the favourite for deputy Public Protector. The legal adviser to Public Service and Administration Minister Senzo Mchunu has repeatedly been called on to answer for her time at the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) and as legal adviser to disgraced former home affairs minister Malusi Gigaba. Gcaleka was nominated to fill the shoes of outgoing Kevin Malunga by advocate Adele Barnard, a former colleague at the NPA, who has known her for 10 years. Barnard told City Press that she was not concerned about the backlash that followed her nomination because she believed that the 38-year-old “is a good and ethical leader with a wealth of experience”. In her letter of nomination to the portfolio committee on justice and correctional services, Barnard wrote that Gcaleka had more than 14 years’ experience, eight of which were at senior management level, and that she had been involved in numerous social justice projects. She said despite Gcaleka’s obvious nervousness in the interview process, she was satisfied that the advocate was exceptional in her responses. In her letter of nomination to the portfolio committee on justice and correctional services, Barnard wrote that Gcaleka had more than 14 years of experience, eight of which were at senior management level, and that she had been involved in numerous social justice projects. Gcaleka grew up in Johannesburg, often visiting her rural home in Umzimkhulu, on the lower south coast of KwaZulu-Natal. She previously worked as a senior deputy director of public prosecutions and a senior state advocate. Ahead of her move to Mchunu’s office, she had started her own consulting firm. “Her experience in dealing with complex and sensitive high-profile matters under pressure, in case management, use of expert evidence in investigations, as well as identifying and implementing cost-cutting measures are suitable attributes for the position. “Her experience in the implementation of solutions for these difficult and extremely challenging matters, together with her ability to take decisions on how and what matters to prioritise under pressure, particularly in the prosecution environment, will contribute to advancing the work of the office of the Public Protector,” Barnard wrote. Gcaleka has an LLB from the University of KwaZulu-Natal and is currently pursuing a master’s degree in commercial law at the University of Johannesburg. A person who worked alongside Gcaleka in Gigaba’s office corroborated her version of events at the minister’s office, telling the committee that most of the damage had been done by the time Gcaleka joined home affairs: “The trouble had started and at that point all she could do was manage the fallout. You must also remember that she only advised Gigaba, it was up to him to accept the advice – sometimes he did and other times he did not. “I am more concerned about her proximity to political players and whether she will be able to hold them accountable should the need arise. That said, I do think she should be given the benefit of the doubt.” Another colleague of Gcaleka in the NPA described her as having a strong personality, as someone who stood her ground in the face of serious resistance. “The [former head of crime intelligence Richard] Mdluli matter was difficult, but she stood her ground despite losing people she was close to in the process.” Asked in the interview about her previous participation in the ANC Youth League, Gcaleka said she had cut all political ties for at least eight years and disagreed that her new role would be used to settle factional scores. “I was an advisor to Gigaba for two years, now Mchunu. My advice to them [was based] on facts and the law, not politics. I am not a political adviser, I am a professional. I worked in the professional sector under the NPA for many years; what is important is to uphold the rule of law and stay clear of factions,” Gcaleka said. Meanwhile, the National Assembly last week adopted new rules on the removal of office bearers in the institutions supporting constitutional democracy. The process was set in a motion by the DA’s bid to have Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane removed from office after a series of damning court judgments. The new rules make provision for a three-member panel which must, within 30 days of its appointment, conduct and finalise a preliminary assessment proposing an inquiry based on section 194 of the Constitution and make recommendations to the Speaker. Should the National Assembly adopt the recommendation, a relevant committee will then be tasked with conducting an inquiry and penning a report on whether or not to remove the Public Protector. 