Gogo Clara Nose has swapped sewing and needlework for a skipping rope and boxing gloves, which she dons at the Cosmo City Multipurpose Centre, north of Johannesburg. When Clara joined A Team Boxing in 2015, she was always the last one to reach the finish line. The 65-year-old former teacher was involved in two car accidents in 2010 and later developed a severe asthmatic condition, which restricted her movements. She could hardly sleep because she struggled to breathe. But since becoming a member of A Team Boxing four years ago, her health has improved drastically. “The hospital has even told me to reduce the intake of my medication as I can breathe better now since I started exercising,” says Clara enthusiastically. Her day starts with warm porridge and a 1km walk to the gym. A garlic, ginger and lemon snack organised by coach Claude Maphosa starts the session. Like true champions, the team of gogos moves from left to right, bobbing and weaving in their boxing gloves as they take instructions from the coach. A two-hour session includes walking around the building, punching in the ring, stomach exercises and weightlifting. Their energy levels and bodies are sometimes tested, but that does not stop them from finishing the rounds. The A Team Foundation is a nonprofit organisation and its boxing programme is keeping senior citizens excited and entertained, with the added bonus of helping them to get fit. After a request from the gogos in the area, former bodybuilder and gym owner Maphosa created a specially tailored programme for older women. The gym trains all ages. However, it gives special focus to the grannies, starting from 65 years, with the oldest at 88 years. The program has also seen male elders joining the team. “Our aim was to do the gym and stage events like body building but the grannies were keen to do boxing. That was it! They then became boxing grannies” said Maphosa on how he started working with the grannies in 2014. The organisation also offers other programs such tutoring and mentoring the youth. The programs are largely sustained by Maphosa and his team.   