“We believe that culture does not kill. Everyone has a right to life.” These are the words of the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities (CRL Rights Commission) chairperson Professor Luka David Mosoma, followed reports of the death of 22 young men at initiation schools in the Eastern Cape. Addressing the media on Thursday at the CRL Rights Commission offices in Johannesburg, Mosoma declared the suspension of the initiation centres affected. “The CRL Rights Commission unequivocally declares a suspension of the initiation schools and practice for a year in the four affected regions of the Eastern Cape, especially where deaths occurred. [This will remain] until all compliance matters are comprehensively addressed,” he said. “The commission has observed with dismay that, in certain instances, the cultural practice of initiation robs families and communities of young people who either die or suffer genital amputation. The deaths of around 22 initiates are clearly a violation of the sanctity of human life,” Mosoma added. He also called for the rescue of the initiates who are still at those centres where the deaths occurred. A group of young men come back home after a successful initiation in the Eastern Cape. Picture: Khaya Ngwenya/File Health Minister Dr Zweli Mkhize, Eastern Cape Premier Oscar Mabuyane and MEC for Health Sindiswa Gomba visited some of the schools earlier this week and said the main cause of the deaths was dehydration. City Press reported that the provincial health department spokesperson Sizwe Kupelo said some would-be initiates stop taking water before they undergo the rite. “They die from dehydration just days after being circumcised. In fact, it is a myth that not taking water will help initiates heal faster. The truth of the matter is that we cannot survive without water so why should initiates be any different to the rest of us?” This has led to the government pledging to donate water to initiation schools in the province and investigate the safety of these schools. READ: Initiation – ‘Women carry these boys for nine months and we kill them in just eight days’ In the Eastern Cape alone, more than 788 young men have lost their lives since 2006 during the rite of passage initiation process. A further 317 boys have had their private parts amputated during the same period due to complications arising from botched circumcisions.  The commission chair urged communities to act and for law enforcement agencies to bring to book those responsible for the loss of life. “Culture does not kill, everyone has the right to life. We therefore implore our communities to refrain from using culture as an instrument of death because where there is death the community mourns,” Mosoma said. “It is important that life should be protected and natured. It is the role of all of us to make sure that this reality happens,” he concluded.