The EFF has retained the majority of its founding central command team (CCT) members who make up the highest decision-making structure in between conferences. The second national elective congress – referred to as the National People’s Assembly – which is currently underway in Johannesburg also opted to add an additional 5 members to the structure which is now made up of 40 people. All of the new members of the CCT were duly elected having met the threshold without going to the ballot box. Delegates opted to bring an end to nominations once reaching the desired 40. The election of the CCT follows that of the new look top six which was elected yesterday evening – with Marshall Dlamini as secretary general, Poppy Mailola as deputy secretary general, Veronica Mente as national chairperson and Omphile Maotwe as treasurer general. EFF president Julius Malema and deputy president Floyd Shivambu are back for a second term in their previous roles as the founding presidency of the six-year-old organisation. Malema had yesterday urged delegates to be circumspect in choosing the new members of the powerful structure saying: “I hope this conference will not use the CCT as a dumping area for mediocrity, you must provide us with the best of the best. “The CCT committees are not fully functional. Despite being assigned to specific tasks, most commissars seated here do not do anything related to their CCT portfolios. They must not lie. “A substantial number of EFF leaders – mostly those deployed in positions of responsibility – are not loyal to the EFF, but are loyal to their positions of deployment. You are going to see it when this conference is over: Some of them are not going to be elected, and they are going to start insulting the organisation after not being elected,” Malema said during his political report. Of the previous 35, 13 have not made it back. Three of those who did not make it back are former top six officials – former treasurer general Leigh-Ann Mathys, former national chairperson Dali Mpofu and former secretary general Godrich Gardee. The former secretary general was the only one of the three who was nominated but declined. Former deputy secretary general Hlengiwe Mkhaliphi is the only former top six official from the last term who is back in the CCT. Two young leaders also did not make it back in the form of former EFF student command president Peter Keetse and current deputy secretary general Rendani Nematswerani. New arrivals include former student leader Vuyani Pambo, EFF MP Yoliswa Yako and the first EFF Student Command president Mpho Morolane and former EFF Student Command secretary general Phiwaba Madokwe. Reneiloe Mashabela Anthony Matumba Nontando Nolutshungu Zilindile Vena Hlengiwe Mkhaliphi Fana Mokoena Dr Mbuyiseni Ndlozi Dr Lawrence Matsitela Fikile Oortman Dr Susan Thembekwayo Mmabatho Mokause Laetticia Arries Rebecca Mohlale Babalwa Mathulelwa Sam Matiase Khosi Mkhonto Nokulunga Sonti Mathapelo Siwisa Nomvuyo Tafeni Natasha Ntlangwini Thembi Msane Shikota Mkhwwanazi Delisiwe Ngwenya Jeanet Komane Mbali Dlamini Lorato Tito Yoliswa Yako Phiwaba Madokwe Thabane Miya Anita Marys Pebane Moteka Sharon Letlape Patrick Sindane Mgcini Tshwaku Vuyani Pambo Nazier Paulsen Sinawo Thambo Tsako Mafanya Mpho Morolane Ntokozo Hlonyana  