The largely one-way movement of academics and students across the globe can be curbed if barriers are broken down. This is the view of University of Pretoria vice-chancellor, Professor Tawana Kupe, who recently received an honorary doctorate degree in humanities by a US university. “A consequence [of boundaries] is that nations of the Global South [developing states] experience a brain drain to the Global North [developed states such as the US],” he commented after receiving his honorary doctorate from the Michigan State University on Friday. He said there was a need to break down these boundaries through approaches to knowledge creation. “The multiplicity of current local and global challenges do not come neatly packaged so they can be understood and solved through disciplinary approaches. They are messy, complicated, intersectional, and require innovative transdisciplinary approaches. They require the combined scale and critical mass of the global academy working with society,” Kupe explained. He said this could be achieved through alliances, collaborations, partnerships and networks within and beyond universities, across continents. Kupe, who took up his position as the vice-chancellor and principal at the Tshwane university in January, has led several collaboration agreements with many universities. He was also recently elected chairperson for Africa in the Australia-Africa Universities Network, a body that has member universities that enter into collaborative agreements to provide expertise across areas of priority for Australia and the continent. Kupe said he accepted the honorary degree on behalf of universities in Africa and the people of Africa. He said Michigan State is a leader in forging collaborations and networks across continents and has contributed to creating capacity and institutions in Africa that produce knowledge to address local challenges. “My university is on a journey to transform from an institution that is locally rooted but not sufficiently embracing of its continental and global dimensions. We aspire to be an African global university, locally responsive, continental in scope and globally engaged and interacting, to make a significant contribution to transforming Africa and the world,” Kupe said. He said the world faces complex, interrelated challenges which include the climate emergency, unprecedented threats to environmental sustainability, political instability, persistent poverty, and the burden of disease. However, he said new knowledge can be applied to tackle these seemingly intractable challenges. “We can take advantage of the opportunities provided by rapid technological change to create a better and more sustainable world. Scientific breakthroughs and innovation are making a major difference, enabling progress in many areas of life,” Kupe said. He said within universities there are restrictive boundaries and borders in the organisation of knowledge in distinct disciplines. “Disciplines have become hard-bound spaces instead of leaky porous avenues that enable critical thinking, critical inquiry and the development of problem-solving skills.” Kupe spoke about boundaries that exist between academic institutions within and across nations. He said knowledge needed to become a common currency across institutions. “It requires a dense network of co-creating and knowledge-sharing institutions, bound together by a common dedication to transforming the world.” Michigan State president, Dr Samuel L Stanley Jnr, told the congregation and graduates that Kupe was a scholar and a visionary educator. “You exemplify what it means to be a globally-engaged citizen, serving local needs with a focus on the most pressing challenges we face across the world,” Stanley Jnr said. Stanley Jnr said Kupe is a leader in providing quality education to UP’s more than 53 000 students. “You are a champion of the UP’s new Future Africa campus, where scholars from across the world will come to leverage the benefits of trans-disciplinary research to address the grand challenges that face Africa and the world, a goal of Michigan State as well. For your dedication to developing well-informed and skilled professionals for a global society, I am pleased to award you the honorary degree,” Stanley Jnr said.