The 37-year-old allegedly performed oral sex on one boy and exposed all the boys, aged 13 and 14, to pornography and sent them nude pictures of herself A 37-year-old mother from Pretoria has been accused of raping and sexually assaulting minor boys at one of Pretoria’s most exclusive boys’ schools. The charge of rape apparently relates to oral sex that the woman allegedly performed on one of the boys. Some of the boys are as young as 13 and 14 and are believed to be friends with the woman’s teenage daughter. It is understood that several of the boys attend a prominent high school in Pretoria. The woman appeared in the Pretoria Magistrates’ Court on Tuesday on 10 charges, including sexual grooming, exposing children to pornography and sexual assault, and one charge of rape. She was released on bail of R7 500. The state alleges the crimes were committed over a period of five months. During this time she also allegedly sent nude photographs of herself to boys, as well as a video in which she was masturbating. The accused was arrested 18 days ago after the parents of one of the complainants came across the photographs and videos on their son’s phone. After a police investigation, five boys were identified – two of them were 13 and three were 14. Hendrik Hugo of ENSafrica, who is appearing on behalf of the boys, said they and their parents were “unbelievably traumatised” and did not want to talk about the incident. Neither the woman nor her husband were willing to comment. In the meantime, the woman has also been accused of stealing a businessperson’s idea for an app to transport children in a school taxi system. Gerhard Viljoen, the designer of the Schoolride app, told his attorneys to send a letter to the woman because she had allegedly stolen his idea and was marketing it under another name. The accused is the director of a company that designs apps. The company advertises its version of Viljoen’s app as a “proudly South African” product that allows parents – who are looking for rides for their children to school events – to meet one another. Parents willing to transport children around can then register to become drivers and earn money by transporting kids. Only parents are allowed to join the app, which was set to be launched in January. When Viljoen became aware that his software had allegedly been poached, he contacted the accused and her husband. They denied that they had stolen his idea or software. “They said they went to the coast in December and that they had thought of the idea for this sort of ride-along club while they were there. “Their mistake was that they used exactly the same wording that I used for my app. They conceded that the wording was the same as mine, but they were so arrogant that they are going to go ahead with their own app,” said Viljoen. His patent attorneys sent a letter of demand to the couple based on infringement of copyright and unlawful competition. This was right before the couple planned a launch of their app in September. Viljoen said the couple simply ignored the letter. He told City Press’ sister publication, Rapport, that he had been left with no choice but to sue them. Viljoen said he was shocked to find out that the woman who allegedly infringed the copyright in his app, was an accused in a matter involving sex offences against minors. “My app works specifically and exclusively with children. I can’t say if there’s a connection, but there are red lights that she’s the same person who stole my app and that she’s working with children.”  City Press