Journalists at disgraced 24-hour television news broadcaster eNCA are finally sharing their experiences with fired news executive Kanthan Pillay and a disturbing image depicting a deep-seated culture of bullying and lack of understanding from the former head of news is beginning to take shape. In his short stint as the head of news – after he was appointed in October – Pillay has, according to his subordinates, been a “nightmare to deal with”. “It’s always his way or the highway, you can’t reason with him when he is set in his way. We then have no choice but to concur even when we disagree,” said a journalist who wished to remain anonymous. WhatsApp text messages shared with City Press have further highlighted the iron fist with which Pillay has been running the newsroom. Pillay’s hardliner approach to management became evident during staff discussions on how to cover the Botswana elections which were set for later that month. READ: EFF criticises eNCA for ‘racist treatment of African journalist’ Journalists suggested in the broadcaster’s internal WhatsApp group that they accept an invitation to cover the elections from the neighbouring country’s government. A suggestion that was immediately dismissed by Pillay who cited a policy decision by eNCA editor-in-chief Jeremy Maggs around not taking money from the Botswana government “as it could be seen to be compromising the broadcaster’s impartiality”. Even though journalists try and indicate to Pillay that eNCA had accepted a similar invitation from the Mozambique government to cover their elections, Pillay dismissed the concerns arguing that they do not truly wish to cover the event. “If there is a genuine desire on the part of specific reporters/camera team to cover the elections, we can do that” adding that Gaborone is just four and a half hours’ drive away and urges his journalists to drive there, cover the elections for the entire day and drive back that very evening. “I drove to Durban-King Williams Town in 1981 to cover Griffiths Mxenge’s funeral with four colleagues from a variety of publications. We split fuel expenses and we drove back that night after the funeral,” says Pillay who adds that “this profession is about passion, if you care enough to get the story, you will do whatever it takes”. In separate WhatsApp conversations shared with City Press, Pillay refers to police officials who invited the media to a scheduled take down of “a massive arms cache and dagga lab” in Pretoria as “numbnuts” and urged his journalists to interrogate why they were targeting dagga labs instead of illegal traders. “Legal marijuana will save our economy if we get the framework right,” was his argument. When a junior journalist challenged his stance saying that “the question of the benefits of dagga to the economy of South Africa is better placed elsewhere,” Pillay responded with: “I apologise, if you mistook my statement for a suggestion. It was an instruction.” On Thursday evening following concerted efforts by colleagues of the dismissed Samkele Maseko and the suspended Khayelihle Khumalo, eNCA’s Maggs finally broke his silence and addressed the enraged staff. He indicated that Pillay would be offering an apology shortly, that he was open to an external investigation by an external media monitoring organisation and engaging with the staff on the matters at hand. Those who spoke to City Press questioned why Maggs only acted after an internal memorandum was handed over to him. “He [Maggs] had been silent on this matter the entire time and now that we have written a memorandum then he sends an email,” said a journalist at the broadcaster who rubbished the email as just a prelude to the apology that Pillay sent. Pillay has since apologised for his tweet and the harm it has caused. City Press was also reliably informed that during the meeting, staff were told to expect Pillay back at work on Tuesday as he would not be suspended which further enraged staff who then questioned why Khumalo was suspended for tweeting from his personal account while a senior executive who called a subordinate “a rat” on twitter was getting differential disciplinary treatment. eNCA, however, announced on Friday that it was parting ways with Pillay. In a statement, Maggs said: “eNCA has parted company with its director of news Kanthan Pillay with immediate effect. This follows outrage and condemnation after a tweet he posted.” “The tweet does not represent the views of e-Media Investments and the channel.” Adding that: “After intense overnight investigation and consultation, the channel decided it had no alternative but to end its relationship with him. Although he was acting in an individual capacity and his posting was unsolicited, he was nonetheless a senior member of staff and the channel believes there was no room for any other outcome, and that damage control was imperative. Serious allegations have also been levelled at eNCA about Pillay’s censorship of stories and his management style.” Maggs said the decision was taken with the knowledge that all news organisations only thrived on one currency which was their credibility which had been hurled into doubt as a result of Pillay’s alleged actions. “It is clear that this negative attention has adversely affected eNCA’s reputation and credibility. However, with the talented and dedicated staff we have, I believe the channel can recover. Right now our immediate priorities are to mend strained relationships and to rebuild credibility with our audience and other stakeholders as soon as possible,” said Maggs.  Journalists who spoke to City Press said, from the onset, Pillay’s appointment was “questionable” and his engagement with staff has always been “harsh and bullish”. In October, EFF’s national spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi expressed concern regarding the appointment of Pillay as head of news, questioning why the broadcaster had gone for a failed former politician who contested this year’s national and provincial elections with his political party, the South African Capitalist Party — whose logo is a purple cow. Pillay’s treatment of journalists at the broadcaster came under the spotlight after political journalist Maseko resigned and Khumalo was placed on suspension for tweeting about the EFF’s elective conference from his personal account. Maseko, alleged that Pillay did not allow him to serve out his notice and escorted him out of the premises of the broadcaster on Tuesday. This opened a can of worms on editorial interference and censorship at the broadcaster. While other senior personnel at the broadcaster have chosen to remain tight lipped over the matter, the likes of Dasen Thathiah, Lindokuhle Xulu and Thembekile Mrototo have taken to social media and expressed not only their support for Maseko and Khumalo, but also journalistic independence within eNCA. They all posted a message: “After recent disturbing events, we’ve met with eNCA management and made it clear we stand for independent journalism. We’ll protect the sanctity of our credibility. We won’t allow the integrity of our news profession to be made a mockery of.”   