Former EFF secretary-general Godrich Gardee will not be lost to the political wilderness. Instead, Gardee will be tasked with formulating a united EFF structure across the African continent. This was announced by party leader Julius Malema as he made his closing address at the party’s 2nd National People’s Assembly. “The EFF has resolved to form a united EFF structure across Africa and Godrich will be heading that organisation,” said Malema. He lauded the decision taken by the party leadership and delegates during conference. “We will be the first organisation in the country to have a consolidated structure with structures even outside our borders,” said Malema. Earlier, central command team member Thembi Msane addressed the media and reported back after chairing the commission on international relations last night. She said during the commission the resolution was taken that the party should consolidate all EFF structures across the continent under one EFF structure led by one leader. She added that the party was also going to formulate a youth command structure across the continent. Msane explained that the thinking behind this was to have these EFF structures in other countries calling on their respective governments to do away with borders to pave the way for a united Africa. “We envision a united Africa with no borders hence uniting these structures under one EFF will prepare us to govern this united Africa,” said Msane. In the same spirit of taking charge, the EFF pledged to build schools “for the poorest of the poor”. “In the next five years we will build a school that is going to be attended by the children of poor families. In the next five years if we come back to the 3rd National People’s Assembly and we haven’t built a school we would have failed; don’t elect all of us back to leadership positions,” said Malema. He questioned why businesspeople like Patrice Motsepe had not built a school and said it was untoward that “we have people (Oprah Winfrey) coming into the country and building schools for us”. He said the school will be named the Winnie Madikizela-Mandela school. “We have been able to raise R32 million in a few months for this conference, if we can do that, we can raise more money to build a school,” he said.  