It’s unclear if Ramaphosa will extend Muofhe’s stay in the agency amid claims of tension with his boss, Ayanda Dlodlo. Advocate Mahlodi Muofhe’s term of office as the head of the domestic branch of intelligence in the State Security Agency (SSA) expires in March next year and this has set tongues wagging on whether or not President Cyril Ramaphosa would retain him. A newly reconfigured SSA is scheduled to kick in next April and the top three leadership positions in the agency, one occupied by Muofhe, would no longer exist, thus his short contract. The other positions are that of super director general, currently held by Loyiso Jafta in an acting capacity as well as the acting head of the SSA’s foreign branch, Joyce Mashele. But, unlike Muofhe, Jafta and Mashele are SSA’s permanent employees. Ramaphosa could offer Muofhe a lifeline in the new structure, but the odds seem stacked against him. In his short stint since taking over the running of all spying services in August this year, Muofhe has had a spat with State Security Minister Ayanda Dlodlo. Dlodlo, whose allies are eager to see Muofhe gone, is unlikely to give him the nod when Ramaphosa goes in search of a suitable candidate to become the first director general of the new National Intelligence Agency (NIA). The NIA would assume the functions of the current domestic branch after the reconfiguration. READ: Security minister at war with spy chiefs At 63, Muofhe is also beyond the pensionable age of 60, a requirement of the Intelligence Services Act and government’s security cluster in general, including police, correctional services and defence. According to the act, if it is in the public interest to retain a member beyond the retirement age, their services may, with the minister’s approval, be retained for a period not exceeding five years. Such considerations happen under exceptional circumstances, including the requirement for specialised knowledge and extensive experience in the field. The presidency said that currently “Muofhe is not employed in terms of the Intelligence Services Act but rather the Public Services Act which has a retirement age of 65 years”. Presidency spokesperson Khusela Diko said Muofhe’s contract was short because his current position would no longer exist in the new structure. Regarding the fallout between Muofhe and Dlodlo, Diko said: “The president remains committed to the building of a professional national intelligence capability for South Africa that will respect and uphold the Constitution and the relevant legislative prescripts.” Diko said this was the context within which Ramaphosa continued to engage with Dlodlo and the SSA leadership. Under the new structure, the SA Secret Service would also be formed as the foreign branch of intelligence services — under a new director general — which means that the super director general post currently held by Jafta would also cease to exist. But Jafta already has a permanent contract as deputy director general and has the option to return to his original post come April 1 – if the deadline is met. The anticipated changes form part of the recommendations of the high-level review panel, which found that there was “political malpurposing and factionalisation of the intelligence community”, resulting in an almost complete disregard for the Constitution, policy, legislation and other prescripts. In March the panel proposed the splitting of the agency into a domestic and a foreign service – with the former led by Muofhe. But at “the farm”, as the SSA is often referred to, Muofhe is believed by insiders to enjoy close “proximity” to Ramaphosa, and they argue that this gave him more influence on the affairs of the agency than Dlodlo. SSA spokesperson Mava Scott told City Press that in terms of the Public Services Act, it was Ramaphosa’s prerogative to give guidance on Muofhe and Jafta’s situation. Scott said that among the challenges Dlodlo faced in her efforts to transform the SSA in line with the review panel’s proposals were “staffing issues, including especially the prolonged acting arrangements and vacant posts at management level impacting on our capacity to deliver on our mandate”. Proximity to Ramaphosa? Muofhe and Jafta have been accused of sabotaging Dlodlo. One incident cited was when the minister formed a team to advise her on strategy but some of the members later snubbed the planned meetings. Dlodlo’s sympathisers blamed the influence of both Muofhe and Jafta. A person in the Ramaphosa inner circle dismissed claims that Dlodlo could be the first out of the door if Muofhe had his way, amid talk of a looming Cabinet reshuffle. The source said Ramaphosa’s style of leadership was to allow people space to do their work without interference. He would only step in and speak out when things were going wrong. “When he is not saying anything you must know that he is happy with how things are being handled,” said the source, who added that Dlodlo had nothing to worry about as long as Ramaphosa had not shown any dissatisfaction with her work. However, it was understandable that Dlodlo would be “unsettled” when her name was mentioned among the targets for a Cabinet reshuffle, more so because she was not in Ramaphosa’s inner circle and only got co-opted into the ANC national executive committee recently after missing out on a spot at the party’s national elective conference in 2017. The source also dismissed claims that Muofhe had Ramaphosa’s ear, and therefore more influence on the president than Dlodlo. “The only thing that connects them is that they both come from Chiawelo [township in Soweto] and nothing more. Muofhe even joined the CR17 campaign [to elect Ramaphosa as ANC president in 2017] towards the tail end,” said the source. Progress in implementing review panel report Diko said Ramaphosa received regular briefings on the implementation of the recommendations of the high-level review panel and significant progress had been made in several areas. The updates included the agency’s readiness to present to Cabinet a draft bill to end the existence of the SSA to allow the new structure to be formalised. “The agency has also undertaken a benchmarking in respect of expanding the ambit of oversight of the Auditor-General’s office into its affairs. Already a number of investigations have been instituted into allegations of malfeasance and disciplinary processes against implicated officials,” she said. Scott said “a phased approach” had been adopted in the implementation of the recommendations of the high-level review panel and internal work streams were actively engaged on the structural matters. However, those sympathetic to Dlodlo said Jafta was yet to submit the proposed new structure to the minister, who needed to champion it, and the department could be running out of time if the April 1 deadline was to be met. “You need to submit a new bill to regulate the new structure. You need a new act that will undo the current act. Jafta has to present the minister with a bill for her to take to the Cabinet lekgotla early next year and then to Cabinet. “But he has not done so. It should have been submitted already,” said the source. “But it’s probably because his position is tenuous under the new bill; he is sitting on the proposal. There is trepidation: one of Jafta losing his position and the issue of Muofhe’s age.” The elephant in the room However, Muofhe’s allies disagreed with the source of the friction between the trio, saying “the elephant in the room” was an unlawful instruction from Dlodlo issued to Muofhe earlier in September when she wanted the interception of the planned xenophobic attacks in Johannesburg. “No matter how hard you try to go this or that way, she confirmed that she gave an illegal instruction,” said the insider. When Muofhe tried to get permission from the judge to assist the SSA with the interceptions, he got feedback that there was no judge available. This was because the term of the former judge had expired “three months ago” and a new judge was yet to be appointed. So the interception could not be authorised. The insider claimed Dlodlo was adamant that the interception should go ahead, saying that she did not want “blood on her hands like in Marikana”. Her allies also argued that under section 7 of the Rica Act, interceptions in an emergency were allowed, and the unpredictable xenophobic violence merited the invocation of such powers. Chrispin Phiri, spokesperson for justice and correctional services, said former judge Justice HMT Musi was designated as the intercepting judge by former minister Michael Masutha on August 23 2017 – from September 1 2017 to August 31 this year. On September 9 this year, new Justice Minister Ronald Lamola designated Justice Bess Nkabinde as the intercepting judge – from September 11 this year to September 10 2021. Muofhe’s allies also said he again clashed with Dlodlo when he refused to back her plans to bring in former Independent Police Investigative Directorate head Robert McBride as deputy director general for counter-intelligence. Dlodlo then allegedly stopped consulting Muofhe and Jafta on her plans. Instead, she allegedly started speaking to their subordinates behind their backs. She is said to have spoken to acting deputy director general of counter-intelligence Sipho Blose and his colleague Nozuko Bam, deputy director general: domestic collection, who she allegedly offered new posts behind Jafta’s and Muofhe’s backs. 