The special SA Communist Party (SACP) conference that starts on Monday will again debate the recurring question of whether it should sever ties with the ANC to contest elections alone. The SACP’s first general secretary, Solly Mapaila, told City Press the conference was unlikely to end the alliance it had with ruling party. The discussion documents, recently released by the party, stated that there had been some backlash from party members who believed “national leadership was out of touch with their own lived experience of ANC abuse on the ground”. Mapaila said the matter had been a big talking point in the party in the past few conferences, but what was on the table now was the possibility of contesting independently from the ANC, but still maintaining the alliance. Mapaila said the SACP still played an important part in the fight against inequality in the country and it had just the right following to accomplish the “national democratic revolution”. He said the party was more concerned about the leadership of the ANC, which had “no sense of urgency” in providing good service delivery. “Some of the comrades, the way they behave, they respond to social problems as if they are asking our people not to get hungry, because they are not ready,” he said. Mapaila raised concerns about the corruption within the governing party, pointing out that some of its members had been accused of looting. Mapaila believed there were South Africans who would vote for the SACP if it were to mobilise and contest elections independently. “There is a constituency; it needs an appropriate party that is able to articulate its concerns.” But, he said, the SACP – given its preoccupation in dealing with the issue of inequality – did not want people to stop focusing on what needed to be done, which might happen if the party demobilised. City Press previously reported that the provincial structure in the Western Cape had come out as the first to openly call for the special national congress to be an elective one as part of a bid to “renew” and refocus the organisation. However, a source within the party said it was not certain whether there would be any contestations as the national leadership had not alerted delegates and there was no mention of that process in the programme. Despite his concerns about the ANC, Mapaila hailed President Cyril Ramaphosa for the work he had done to correct systemic errors and for clearing the dark cloud that had been hanging over government institutions. According to the discussion documents, inner-party tension was somewhat “managed” after the last congress, partly because of Ramaphosa’s appointment as ANC leader, which led to the SACP playing a critical role in the struggle against state capture. “He [Ramaphosa] has made wonderful interventions, cleaning governance at a systemic level and positively responding to the needs and concerns of the people of the country,” Mapaila said, adding that Ramaphosa had been working hard to create jobs and had formed important ties with business. “Ramaphosa went all out to try to get business to rebuild confidence in South Africa. He held a job summit with all stakeholders, mobilising every constituency.” Mapaila said that while the changes made by the president might seem futile to poor South Africans, these were, however, important steps to be taken to ensure that the country was able to rebuild. They also highlighted the desperation felt by citizens who wanted and needed good service delivery. Mapaila believed it was important that action be taken against those who had been implicated at the Zondo commission into state capture. Many current and former ministers who had appeared before the commission were ANC members and Mapaila said this should not mean these individuals were exempt from facing criminal charges. “The action will be taken because action is not a consequence of what the ANC wants, it’s a consequence of the law. We want political action and criminal action taken otherwise it will be a waste of state resources,” he said.  Political journalist | City Press