Two high schools were targeted by robbers within hours of each other – Norkem Park High School in Kempton Park and Edenvale High School in Edenvale. The robbers at Norkem Park High School made off with R25 000 this morning and the suspects are still at large. A 62-year-old member of the School Governing Body (SGB) had gone to withdraw the money for a school trip and was attacked at gunpoint upon return to the school. This was according to Gauteng Education MEC Panyaza Lesufi who, earlier this afternoon, was at the scene of the other robbery and shooting at Edenvale High School. Spokesperson for the department of basic education Elijah Mhlanga also confirmed the incident on his Twitter page.  Lesufi could not immediately provide details on when or how the incident happened and whether the suspects had been apprehended. Speaking to the media in Edenvale this afternoon, Lesufi said the robbers entered the school under false pretences. “This morning one person came [to the school] and [told] the security that he is here to collect his child. When they opened, five other suspects came in armed and they demanded the principal and where the safe is. I’m told it was petty cash just around R8 000 that they managed to lay their hands on,” Lesufi said. “Fortunately, the school has a very strong security system so the alarms were pressed and the 24/7 security arrived on the scene.”  The school is near a police station and a shoot-out ensued shortly after the police arrived. Two men, who were later identified as part of the gang, were killed. “We’re just next to the police station. That’s how brazen people can be. How do you rob a school that is just a few centimeters from the police station? We are exposing our children to things that we shouldn’t have to,” a dismayed Lesufi said. The police’s Lieutenant Kay Makhubela confirmed that two suspected robbers were shot dead shortly before he arrived on the scene and that one had been injured and two others arrested. Makhubela said the suspects in custody would face charges of attempted robbery, attempted murder and possession of unlicensed firearms and ammunition. Lesufi thanked the police and the school’s security company for their swift action and said that all the pupils and staff members were safe. 