It certainly makes you stop and look twice: the brooding portrait of a young man dripping with water. It was used on murals in Khayelitsha in the Western Cape and Gauteng’s Newtown, as well as in a banner across the Facebook page of the world-famous, award-winning Market Photo Workshop in Johannesburg as part of an advertising drive to recruit new students for 2019. However, the student credited by the renowned training institute for taking the photo is no longer studying there. He has been dismissed from the school for stealing the image from rising young photographer Keolebogile Kwaile and claiming it as his. Kwaile says that it seems the student lifted the image from her page on Behance, a website used to showcase creative work. While the Market has accepted liability, apologised to Kwaile, removed the image and disciplined the student, it does not appear willing to pay cash for the work it has appropriated and used commercially. Instead, it has offered the photographer, known for her sensitive approach to work depicting mental health and black life, the opportunity to take classes and mentorship or to use the space to exhibit her work. Kwaile, who supports the Market’s work in developing young photographers, is far from impressed. “I have been really affected by this. It has made me feel helpless, like anyone can just take my work and claim it is theirs. What is the point? What if people think I stole the image from him? I mean, his credit was on the Market’s ads.” She says that the photo is from a series she has been working on about self-love. “The model, who I have a contract with, is a friend. I took the photo on his 30th birthday and 30 comes with a lot of pressure. I used water to signify rebirth.” She says she was planning to exhibit the series and to sell the work in question. “I can’t do that now,” she told City Press. Kwaile says she does not need the Market’s help to exhibit and that its offer is not meaningful to her career at this stage. She wants to be paid a reasonable, market-related rate for the use of her image. But the manager of programmes and projects at the photo school, Khona Dlamini, while accepting responsibility for the copyright theft, said: “At the time of meeting with Ms Kwaile, she stated quite explicitly that she was not interested in financial compensation and wanted to be supportive of emerging photographers. The Market Photo Workshop offered Ms Kwaile opportunities for her to engage with various teaching and public engagement programmes aimed at young and emerging photographers. She was enthusiastically responsive to this offer and requested that the Market Photo Workshop confirm the offer to her in an email.” An exasperated Kwaile told City Press she did nothing of the sort. “The reason we had the meeting in the first place is because I told them over email that I would be sending an invoice, and then they basically tried to sweet talk me out of asking to be paid. I said they must put their proposal to me in an email and I would look at it. I never said I didn’t want to be paid.” City Press has copies of the emails, in which Kwaile clearly states that she will be invoicing the school. The school has now told her that the matter is with lawyers. This, after Kwaile indicated that she had consulted with a lawyer about the matter of payment. “The Market Photo Workshop has no intention of fighting Ms Kwaile’s claim to ownership of her work,” said Khona. “The workshop is committed to engaging with her further to ensure that she is appropriately recognised and compensated for her work.” However, there has been silence from the Market, who on Friday asked Kwaile for more time to respond. A simple check of the metadata on the photo shows that it was taken with a different camera to the ones provided to students. Asked why the photo was not verified before it was used commercially, Khona said: “We have a system of verification. However, as happens at learning institutions across the globe, incidents of plagiarism do sometime slip through the cracks. The Market Photo Workshop acknowledges a shortcoming in the verification of this image.” The famous school, home to alumni such as Zanele Muholi and Sabelo Mlangeni, last year won the R1.75 million Principal Prince Claus Award for its development work. TALK TO US Do you think that the Market photo school should compensate Keolebogile Kwaile financially? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword PHOTO and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material