World Cancer Day takes place on February 4 every year, where various organisations across the globe seek to shine a spotlight on the risks involved with cancer and how patients and loved one’s can help to cope with the disease from the moment they are diagnosed. One in four South Africans are either personally diagnosed with or know of someone who has cancer. And 100 000 South Africans are diagnosed with this dreaded disease every year. These statistics come from the Cancer Association of South Africa, but cancer is not endemic to South Africa. The World Health Organisation estimated that last year the deaths of 9.6 million people were as a result of cancer. Dr Elvira Singh, head of the South African National Cancer Registry described the lack of access to proper oncology care a contributing factor towards the rates of cancer. “Certain cancers have a genetic predisposition; certain cancers have a lifestyle predisposition. The risk factors for cancer may be different in different race groups, not just because of the access to health. In South Africa, the majority of the non-white population seeks healthcare in the public sector. We know that the Caucasian population, many of them have medical insurance so they seek healthcare in the private health sector,” Singh told City Press. She explained that globally, South Africa would have to be compared to countries with a similar economic status. “The fact is that we have a pathology-based registry which means that we are collecting data only from patients who have accessed the healthcare system, and have received a diagnosis. Whereas data collection in other countries is different,” she said.  Singh explained that while the cancer numbers had increased since 2011, the incident rates had remained stable. “Our top cancers, which are prostate in men and breast and cervical cancer in women, have remained similar. The patters of cancer haven’t changed. What has changed is that post-2011, if you look at our data, there has been a large increase in certain cancers, but this is only because in 2011 the cancer regulation was promulgated, and it made reporting for the cancer registry compulsory,” she explained. But the statistics are directly related to access to health services. “If we don’t have access to a diagnostic service, we are not going to get diagnosed. Access to health services certainly affects what our rates look like,” she said. Singh warned that if patients were screened for cancer early enough, the cancer would be caught at an earlier stage and could possibly be treated more successfully. In South Africa The PinkDrive, a non-governmental organisation that provides services such as mammograms and pap smears to the indigent and those who do not have access to private medical healthcare, has been working with community members and townships since 2009. The organisation has done nearly 17 000 mammograms, and has educated almost 400 000 women on breast health and almost 32 000 men on prostate cancer.  Noelene Kotschan, chief executive and founder of PinkDrive said that citizens who lived in rural, township and semi-urban areas across South Africa were their highest priority. “Beneficiaries who can afford payment for the service, are charged an approved nominal amount, which in turn funds the services to the indigent and medically uninsured beneficiaries,” she said. As part of the drive to educate citizens, PinkDrive also uses vernacular languages in different areas. “People are different and experience different emotions and challenges when diagnosed with cancer. Some may be the breadwinner of the family and have concerns of what will become of them should the individual pass away. Others may be regarding social status as cancer is still one of those diseases that people do not want to discuss openly. A lot of myths and stigmas exist, and PinkDrive addresses these through education in the vernacular. Unfortunately, one cannot detach challenges when it comes to cancer patients,” Kotschan said. Kotshan said that because of the backlog in hospitals from patients who wait to be treated, PinkDrive steps in to help provide services like mammograms. “It is commonly known [as per media reports] that a province like KwaZulu-Natal, the oncology system has basically collapsed and there are barely any oncologists left to provide services in the public sector. The waiting period is very long and unfortunately by the time the patient does receive the mammogram, they may have already upped a stage of cancer or, sadly, they may never get to that mammogram,” she said. “We’ve heard of patients that resort to their own fundraising initiatives to go for private mammograms as they just cannot wait for the given period,” she added. To commemorate world cancer day, PinkDrive has partnered with the City of Joburg to offer cancer screenings to the community of Alexandra. “We will be at the East Bank Clinic, Region E. PinkDrive will be offering mammograms, clinical breast examinations, a limited amount of pap smears as well as education. Our brother campaign More Balls Than Most, will offer PSA screening and education to address prostate cancer,” Kotshan said. • PinkDrive can be contacted via email at info@pinkdrive.coza or on 0119988022. • #IAmAndIWill – You have the power to reduce the impact of cancer for yourself, the people you love and for the world. It’s time to make a personal commitment. 2019 marks the launch of the three-year I Am and I Will campaign. I Am and I Will is an empowering call-to-action urging for personal commitment and represents the power of individual action taken now to impact the future. 