President Cyril Ramaphosa has taken aim at companies with a monopoly, saying that they will have to swallow the bitter pill of competition that will now begin to take shape in the economy. Ramaphosa made the remarks at Tuynhuys this afternoon shortly before signing into law the competition amendment bill. “If you have looked if you travel around the country, as I do, you always see the same names coming up over and over again,” Ramaphosa said. “When you travel to other countries you actually see a proliferation of various economic players, which enhances competition, but that competition often brings down prices. When there is competition, consumers and customers are able to pick and choose the ones that offer them products and services at the best prices. “Our economy has lacked that and it has lacked that largely because of the history of our country. It was such that only a few of our citizens were allowed to set up companies and to grow them and you had almost 80% of the people of this country who were not given the chance to play in the economy of their own country. “So this has been a major impediment to the growth of our economy. Whether people like it or not it is the reality: where you have domination, you have over-sized companies that block everyone else. You will lack growth, you will lack entrepreneurship, you will lack competition and you will not have prices that everyone can afford.” Ramaphosa said that, for years, a number of commentators at home and abroad, including the International Monetary Fund, had lamented the “highly concentrated” economy of South Africa that has impeded growth, particularly for smaller businesses. The Competition Commission had recently addressed unfair competition in the space of the media as well as the school uniform industry. A number of companies had been on the receiving end of fines and had admitted guilt for offences such as price fixing. “So today we are taking this historic step by taking out one of the cogs that has impeded the growth of our economy by enhancing more competition into our economy by getting the competition authorities to now also focus more directly on the issue of dominance, how companies impede the growth of the economy,” Ramaphosa said. The bill was approved by the National Assembly in October last year, without the support of opposition parties. The Democratic Alliance had raised concerns that the bill gave the minister too much power. “The Competition Amendment Bill puts too great a burden on the competition authorities to solve South Africa’s economic problems. It gives them too much power. And the bill codifies a trend of ministerial interventionism that will undermine the regulators’ independence … Section 18A enables the president to appoint a committee with the power to decide whether an acquisition by a ‘foreign acquiring firm’ is in the interests of national security. This should have been the subject of standalone legislation on foreign investment, not grafted onto the Competition Act as a stopgap measure,” DA member of Parliament Michael Cardo had said at the time. The Economic Freedom Fighters had rejected the bill on the basis that it did not deal with what the party believed to be more serious issues of monopolies in the market. “We voted against the Competition Amendment Bill because we think that there must be a thorough discussion about how to dismantle monopoly industries for people as a whole to share in the mineral resources and wealth of South Africa. The amendment bill is dealing with superficial issues while apartheid beneficiaries continue to consolidate and entrench economic concentration,” a party statement read following the vote in the National Assembly. Ramaphosa was confident this afternoon that the bill would be instrumental in opening up the economy to allow new players to emerge. “We are seeking to remove the constraints so that we can have more competition, more innovation, more new businesses and more successful businesses. This is going to be the benefit for consumers – competition is good, the current players should not complain, they should welcome competition and that is what successful companies in other countries do.”