An attempt to get clarification on Prophet Alph Lukau’s “resurrection” of a man yielded no results for Paseka “Mboro” Motsoeneng, who was left hanging outside the gates of Alleluia Ministries International on Thursday afternoon. “I am not here to fight. If he proves to me that this was genuine and he really did perform a miracle, I will apologise and I will stand for him, but if he lied he must apologise to the nation,” Mboro said. “All I wanted was to come and talk to the man of God about ‘mehlolo ona o tshabehang’ [these shocking things that are frightening].” The Incredible Happenings Church leader’s proclamations came after a video went viral on social media after Lukau, leader of Alleluia Ministries International, claimed to be praying for a dead man whom he then “raised from death”. Mboro, who himself had faced public scrutiny following claims that he had allegedly been to heaven, said that Lukau had brought the Christian faith into disrepute. “This is a misrepresentation of the gospel. People are mocking the gospel of Jesus Christ,” he said. “People who need healing come to us as prophets and pastors, so when one of us does something that is questionable we, as men of God, must talk and ask tough questions.”  Addressing the claims against him Mboro said: “I am fighting these bogus pastors and I am being made to be one of them. It was all a lie. It was fabricated by certain individuals.” Earlier this week, deputy chairperson of the Commission for the Promotion and Protection of the Rights of Cultural, Religious and Linguistic Communities (CRL Rights Commission), Professor David Mosoma, said that “fake prophets” had undermined the intelligence of South Africans for long enough. “The time has come for them [South Africans] to not be duped by these so called ‘fake prophets’ but to start interrogating things and people,” he said. Mboro seemed to echo this sentiment when he said that the nation was being fooled. “There was no miracle that happened here. It was a lie. If it were true, there would have been no delay in presenting the death certificate of the man who supposedly died,” he said.  South African Funeral Practitioners Association chairperson, Thabo Banda, who Mboro had said would be joining him in his quest to confront Lukau, told City Press that there was no agreement between them. “I was not even aware until this morning that he had announced that I would be there. As an organisation we condemn any conniving by undertakers but we realise that what transpired at Lukau’s church was within the religion terrain, not ours, he said.” Banda said he was contacted by lawyers representing Lukau and his church to find ways in which the matter would be remedied. “We want to engage and find solutions therefore we will be meeting with them next week. We do not intend to attack him.” Thoko Mtubu, an Alleluia Ministries International member since 2014, said the she was present when Lukau allegedly resurrected the man and said that he had done nothing wrong. “All the pastor did was pray. That is his duty as a pastor, to pray for anybody who comes here. His job is not to confront or examine a person, he is not a doctor. So on that day he performed his duty as a pastor and prayed. After that, what happened, happened,” she said. “I think he was set up. I mean we are an international church. He has ordained more than 20 bishops, apostles and pastors across the globe and the devil won’t just let things be good.”  Asked about her pastor’s lavish lifestyle, Mtubu said that there was absolutely nothing wrong with the way he was living. “A lavish lifestyle is a choice. The pastor has many businesses. He has wisdom. The pastor also helps congregants who are in need. There is nothing wrong with the way he is living,” she said. Following failed attempts to speak to Lukau, Mboro subsequently made his way to Sandton police station where a case was opened. “I gave a statement and laid charges of fraud, not just against Lukau, but against everybody who was involved in the staging of this so-called miracle. Against the leaders of the church, the man who was supposedly resurrected, his alleged family and the undertakers. Everyone must account,” he told City Press. Sandton police station spokesperson, Captain Granville Meyer, confirmed that a case had been opened. “A case of fraud has been opened but the case will be transferred to Bramley police station because that is where the church is,” he said.