A football event at Krugersdorp prison this week brought with it the unexpected reunion of DJ Cleo and his protégé, Sipho “Brickz” Ndlovu, who is serving 15 years behind bars for rape, at the correctional services facility on the West Rand. Award-winning music producer Cleo, whose real name is Cleopas Monyepao, was part of a group of former local professional soccer players who were invited to the centre as part of an initiative by nonprofit organisation Humanitarian Empowerment Fund to help with the rehabilitation of inmates, among them the fallen kwaito star Brickz. Brickz oozed energy when he emerged from the cells with fellow inmates clad in their orange prison garb. Brickz looked stylish in tan Timberland ankle boots with a matching leather belt, his shirt neatly tucked in. He sprinted towards Cleo, whom he greeted with a firm handshake and a bear hug that lasted for a few seconds. Brickz’s trademark dreadlocks with tints of ginger set him apart from a big crowd of inmates who were allowed to be part of the activities. Ndlovu (35) was the main act in the short programme under the “entertainment” slot. He also mingled freely with everyone in between his shift. While others changed into their soccer kit, Brickz took his place on the decks behind a sound system he had helped to set up. At this point, Cleo was on the opposite side of the pitch, taking goalkeepers through drills alongside former Kaizer Chiefs goalie Tladi Mathibe. Brickz was slotted into the short intervals on the field, during which he played some of his popular hits, including Sweety Ma Baby, and he wooed his fellow inmates with Tjovitjo. Its catchphrase “Ye bafwethu ngicela ama fluit lapho nithi tjovitjo…” got the crowd whistling. This was later followed by the sound of the referee’s whistle at around lunchtime, which signalled the end of the event and meant that the inmates had to head back to reality behind the prison’s high walls. Prior to the final goodbyes, Brickz squeezed in a few seconds to engage in a deep conversation with Cleo, which was interrupted by the final call from the warders for the inmates to make their way back to their cells. Cleo, who was at the prison for a legend’s match against the inmates late last year, said: “We were happy to see each other. This was the first time in six months I’ve seen him because he’s had no visitation rights since he went in six months ago. He’s my brother from another mother, no matter what.” When asked what they spoke about, Cleo said: “The conversations were pretty much about what we discuss every time we meet because it’s never a conclusive conversation. So every time I see him, it’s a continuation. “I also gave him feedback from a parent’s point of view of his son. My assessment of his son’s wellbeing and state of mind, and so on. More importantly, the event was all about the camaraderie.” As we said our goodbyes, Brickz asked us about life on the outside: “Is there anyone who is pushing kwaito like I used to? I’ll be back.”   TALK TO US Do you think initiatives like this will help rehabilitate prisoners? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword PRISON and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material