The electoral commission is ready to facilitate this national and provincial voting process President Cyril Ramaphosa, during his State of the Nation Address on Thursday, announced that South Africans would go to the polls on May 8. Speaking to City Press, the IEC’s chief communication officer, Kate Bapela, said “as indicated in the president’s announcement, the decision was taken after consultation with the IEC. We have also embarked on two successful voter registration drives and are constantly engaging in bilateral consultations with all registered political parties. “With this said, we can therefore say with confidence that we are ready to facilitate the upcoming elections.” The IEC added that, now that the date was set, this provides a clear and certain target for final preparations for the national and provincial elections. Bapela, however, reminded the public that the announcement of the date was not the same as a formal proclamation of the elections – which is the legal action through a government gazette which triggers the start of the official election timetable and its associated electoral processes is circulated. “These electoral processes include the closing of the voters’ roll, the cut-off date for the submission of lists of candidates, certification of the voters’ roll and opening of special vote applications. The election timetable will be discussed with political parties and published immediately following the proclamation of elections.” The president and provincial premiers were expected to proclaim the election date through a government gazette towards the end of February. This will enable eligible voters to still register to vote in the May 8 elections until the day of proclamation. Bapela also revealed that the complaint laid by the ANC against the Democratic Alliance (DA) with regards to an “offensive” campaign poster used by the latter was being finalised and a resolution was expected soon. The DA unveiled the controversial poster last month in the Johannesburg CBD which had as its headline The ANC is Killing SA and then listed the names of children who died after falling into pit latrines, and the victims of the Marikana and Life Esidimeni tragedies. Last month IEC dispute resolution officials met with ANC and DA liaison officials to try and hatch out a resolution.