As the families of the four pupils who were killed at their school in Vanderbijlpark plan their funerals, the principal of the school says they had no idea the bridge that collapsed would pose such a danger. Hein Knoetze said that maintenance was conducted on the bridge throughout the year. “The bridge was loose standing. We never submitted a request to repair it to the department because we never saw it as a danger,” said the Hoërskool Driehoek principal. A total of 26 pupils between the ages of 13 and 18 were on the bridge when it collapsed. According to the Gauteng department of education the pupils, who had just been to assembly, were making their way to their classes when part of the structure gave way. Roydon Olckers (17), Marli Currie (13) and Jandré Steyn (13) died at the scene and another pupil, Marnus Nagel (16), died in hospital on Sunday. According to the department their services will be held during the course of the week. Olckers will be buried at 3pm at the Derde Kruis congregation on the corner of Piet Retief Boulevard and Prinsloo Street in Vanderbijlpark on Friday. A memorial service for Currie will be held at the NG South congregation at 1 Schoeman Street at 11am on Friday. Steyn’s funeral will be held at the River of Life Church at 22 Elliot Street in Vanderbijlpark at 11am on Thursday. “The fourth child died at a local hospital. His condition was worrisome as he went in and out of theatre on several occasions. Unfortunately he succumbed to serious injuries,” said the department.” Read: Death of high school learners needs accountability On Sunday, City Press reported that parents and members of the public had questioned how it was possible for the bridge to collapse, and fingers were pointed at the education department. Gauteng provincial manager for the South African Human Rights Commission, Buang Jones, told City Press that the education department together with the Emfuleni municipality should be held accountable for the collapse. “We are concerned with reports that the department has failed to fix unsafe school buildings in the province and in this school particularly. This incident was a violation of the right to life, the right to education and children’s rights by the department that has failed to ensure the safety of learners,” he said. However, head of the Gauteng education department, Edward Mosuwe, said his department had not received a request from the school about the state of the structure prior to the incident on February 1. “Our indications are that there was never a report presented to us that spoke to the challenges of structural integrity,” he said. Gauteng police spokesperson Kay Makhubela told City Press that his department was still investigating the matter. “We are still waiting for a report from the engineers who were to inspect the structure and inform of us of what exactly led to the collapse of the walkway. At this point in time, we have not received it,” he said. The department said that curriculum support for Grade 12 learners was top priority. “Trauma counselling for Grade 12s would be concluded by today. Trauma counselling for other grades is scheduled for completion by Thursday. The school as far as possible intends to contain the curriculum internally to manage optimal usage of resources,” the department said.