The putrid smell of old urine and sewage hits you first. Then, as you jump over streams and stagnant puddles of slimy streetwater, and look up at the overarching structure, you see broken windows and crumbling balconies where mothers stand supporting children on their hips. This is Hillbrow’s Vannin Court, an old thorn in Johannesburg’s side. Built in the 1920s, the building is located on Kotze Street, which has become a notorious crime spot as thugs and building hijackers run amok. But there is a glimmer of hope. Last week, Vannin Court was announced as being among the first three of 84 buildings earmarked for redevelopment. The city’s mayor, Herman Mashaba, awarded developers ECG Construction the rights to revamp it, along with nearby building Beaconsfield Court, situated on the equally notorious Quartz Street. The third property, an open tract of land in Newtown, was awarded to another company. This is where 500 low-cost homes will be built. So, what does it take to revamp an old, squalid structure whose tenants are crowded into 45 flats and rent out bed space for R300 a month? According to Evan Dryden, a shareholder in the ECG family business, it will take R45 million for Vannin Court. The amount will also cover temporary housing for the current tenants. Dryden says the aim is to create “beautiful, modern” units for rent at R900 a month. The refurbished building will feature a biometric access control system and permanent hot water. It currently lacks these services. At Beaconsfield, the plan is to reconfigure the building’s seven floors and create 56 modern units for rent at the same price. The building’s architect, Heather Dodd, has worked on other buildings along Kotze Street for 16 years.  “This building has been a stubborn obstacle for us,” said Dodd. “You have people living in extremely poor conditions – living with rats, basically, renting out bed spaces. There is sewage overflow, and just one Google search on the building will show you that it has a long history of violence and crime.” For Dodd and her team, the first step is assessing the building’s condition, measuring the existing structure and matching it to its existing building plan. “In Vannin, there are very, very large, old-fashioned units, with 12 units per floor. Then we look at how we can reconfigure the building into a range of unit types – for instance, one or two bedrooms, or even bigger units where three families can share. A lot of people share units in the inner city, so we want to see how we can accommodate that.” Dodd and her team have been unable to assess the building plans yet, and were only able to measure up half a floor. “It is very difficult. There are people living there. We are going into their private space and so on, so there is a lot of vested interest. “At the moment, we have drawn up a plan; we will have to see as it might need modification and work.” It was the same at Beaconsfield. With no access, they took basic measurements, used Google Earth and drew up an outline of the space. “We are replanning the whole thing to be suited to the market,” Dodd said. “It is very difficult because we are trying to target a very low income bracket, and although there are subsidies available, it is difficult to correlate that to the actual costs involved.” Dodd said what excited her most about the project was “bringing it back into the street”.  “It is not safe to walk there. And it’s dirty. There are piles of rubbish, there are flies, it is smelly – it is not a nice place for people to live,” she said. “It isn’t just about one building, but how it works in partnership with other buildings. Once you have a network of revamped buildings, you can start to talk about governing that space. But if you have one building that’s a rogue building, such as Vannin, then it upsets the balance of a street.” She points to an area that used to be a playground. “Children in Hillbrow do not have a life as children. They play in fire escapes and cannot play on the street. So they sit inside and watch TV all day. “Even people renting those beds live in unsociable environments. You go into a unit and there are three TVs going at full blast and a toddler walking past and one person in another room trying to sleep to be up for night shift at their job. I think part of why society is so stressed is because we live in stressful environments.”