ANC national executive committee member Derek Hanekom’s fate, as well as the Public Protector’s reports on President Cyril Ramaphosa and Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan are set to be a burning issue as the ANC convenes its NEC meeting this afternoon. The party’s 80-member committee will be meeting in Pretoria and the knives are sure to be out for Hanekom, given the revelations by the EFF that he met with its secretary-general Godrich Gardee to discuss the ousting of former President Jacob Zuma. The leader of the EFF, Julius Malema, has said he has a list of names of ANC MPs who were prepared to vote against Zuma. The ANC is expected to discuss Ramaphosa’s financial campaign following Mkhwebane’s findings in her report. Ramaphosa has taken the report for judicial review after declaring that it had no legal grounds. Ramaphosa and Gordhan are also sure to face the music from ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule’s camp on their blatant challenge of the Public Protector’s findings on then. Hanekom took to Twitter saying that the purpose of the ANC is to serve the people therefore the country must come before party. Gordhan challenged Mkhwebane’s remedial actions in regard to the “rogue unit”. The minister asked the court to suspend Mkhwebane’s binding remedial orders and interdict her office from enforcing them until a judicial review of her report is concluded. Read: Gordhan asks court to defer action against him Mkhwebane also released a report against Ramaphosa. The report found Ramaphosa had deliberately misled Parliament when he answered a parliamentary question about a payment received by the “CR17 campaign” (Ramaphosa’s campaign) from African Global Operations, formerly known as Bosasa. Read: Free State youth wants 'askari' Hanekom suspended Mkhwebane now faces four separate and highly political court cases on three of her reports: the report into the early pension pay-out of former Sars deputy commissioner Ivan Pillay, the report on the so-called “rogue unit” at the South African Revenue Service, which has been challenged by Gordhan, and the most recent Bosasa report. Ramaphosa’s camp is calling out for the removal of Mkhwebane as Public Protector, and Zuma’s camp is calling for the removal of Hanekom from the ANC. Hanekom’s fate will be discussed at the meeting. The meeting is expected to last the entire weekend and Magashule is expected to share some of the resolutions on Monday or Tuesday.