A dramatic overhaul of all correctional facilities’ inspection procedures is on the cards as newly appointed minister Ronald Lamola implements major changes after security breaches at the Durban Westville Correctional Centre went viral. Addressing the media during a press briefing in Cape Town, Lamola said “full body scanners would be installed at various correctional centres throughout the country to combat the smuggling of illegal substances in prisons”. In addition, “regular patrols, frequent searches of cells, control over objects entering correctional centres, as well as searches of visitors, will be monitored closely by corrections management”. He added: “Safety and security in correctional facilities was paramount and it must be clearly understood that security controls are non-negotiable.” The centres earmarked to get the body scanners are: • Durban Correctional Facility; • St Albans Correctional Facility; • Johannesburg Correctional Facility; • Kgosi Mampuru II Correctional Facility; • Pollsmoor Correctional Facility; • Barberton Correctional Facility; and • Groenepunt Correctional Facility. In addition to these stringent measures, the minister also announced that the department of correctional services had suspended the senior manager for corporate affairs at its Durban management area, after two incidents at Westville Prison recently made headlines. In a video that went viral, wardens can be seen handing inmates weapons and encouraging them to fight. In another video that emerged from the same prison an inmate is listening to music while sniffing a white substance. With respect to these incidents, Lamola said the national commissioner, Arthur Fraser, had recommended that a senior manager responsible for corporate affairs be placed under suspension. The minister urged officials at correctional centres to maintain professional conduct at all times to avoid the unfortunate episodes. “This will ensure that the provision of a safe and secure environment, as well as the creation of an enabling environment for correction and rehabilitation is realised. “This will propel a coordination of systematic interventions aimed at preventing, minimising and eventually eliminating all corrupt and negligent practices that may jeopardise the personal safety of inmates, staff and service providers,” said Lamola. The minister also revealed that search operations were conducted in flagged cells and contraband was found. “Some of the confiscated items include 41 tablets of mandrax, 334 slopes of dagga, seven packages of dagga, six cellphones, four cellphone chargers, eight earpieces, four sim cards, one smoking pipe and one memory stick.” The three inmates on the video were transferred to the country’s only ultramax correctional facility, eBongweni in Kokstad. “This is a referral centre not only for hardened criminals; it also caters for inmates with extreme behavioural challenges,” he said. 