Here are some of the headlines in your City Press News section today: The R100m arts funding scandal Questionable funding deals, amounting to more than R100 million, have rocked the department of arts and culture, led by Minister Nathi Mthethwa, for the 2018/2019 funding period alone. Whistle-blowers claim that Mzansi Golden Economy Fund’s millions are allocated to artists without checks and balances. ANC sued for failing to pay for 595 cars A car rental company is suing the ANC for more than R5.7 million, including interest, after the governing party failed to pay for the 595 motor vehicles it rented ahead of the Nasrec conference. Enhle and DJ Black Coffee in divorce Rumours began last month when the DJ was accused of dating French socialite Cathy Lobé, who shared a video of them on Instagram. Zondo zooms into municipalities The commission’s shift in focus comes as no surprise since the Free State introduced South Africans to the now-infamous Gupta family. JZ vs JZ when Jacob Zuma appears before Judge Zondo The former president’s appearance at the headquarters is one thing, whether he co-operates is another. James Small’s dodgy death The legendary former Springbok who passed away this week was found naked and unconscious in a strip club hours before his death. Dad in dock for incest Graphic affidavit details how teen and her father had sex, exchanged nudes and had a marriage proposal. The Mandela we forgot As she commemorated the 50th anniversary of her father’s death, Ndileka Mandela says it is her responsibility to keep his memory alive – along with that of the three other victims of the Touwsrivier crash. Military chiefs cry foul over dodgy lease Relocation of defence nerve centre to ecopark raises concerns about national security and threats to civilians. Heat is a threat to our health New article finds that more homicides are committed on hotter days in SA. We raised our sons, then men kill them After 17 boys died during the winter initiation women in the Eastern Cape want to become more involved in the custom because men are failing to protect the boys. From the ball boy to the bench High court judge and son of Alexandra township talks about the value of education, being part of SA football’s golden era and wearing specs on the pitch. For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press today.