Graphic affidavit details how teen and her father had sex, exchanged nudes and had a marriage proposal. A 16-year-old girl has revealed how her biological father groomed her for sex, how they sent each other nude photographs, and how he asked her to marry him so they could “spend the rest of their lives together”. On Friday the man appeared in the Boksburg East Magistrates’ Court, charged with rape and incest with the daughter he met for the first time two years ago. City Press also learnt that the Boksburg man was being investigated for sexually grooming his other daughter who is aged 10. The 44-year-old businessman was arrested last week after he violated a protection order which the 16-year-old’s mother obtained against him in February last year. The police detective handling the case said the teenager was placed in a place of safety earlier this year. “In March she had run away with him and hid in a flat in Boksburg. He was arrested on March 15, but the case was not placed on the roll as the prosecutor felt that the case needed further investigation,” the officer said. “He was released and he carried on making contact with her, violating the protection order again and again.” The detective told City Press that the teenager’s mother became suspicious last year when the man started buying his daughter expensive gifts and took her on a cruise ship from Durban to Cape Town. “They slept at the five-star Hilton Hotel in Durban. He bought her two brand-new smart phones, a Samsung tablet, jewellery, watches and other expensive gifts. He basically groomed her over a period of time,” the officer said. The man only met his daughter when she was 14, after her mother told her that the man she believed was her dad was not her biological father. The daughter asked her mother to arrange a meeting with her father, who had last seen her as an infant, after which he severed the relationship with her mother. In a shocking affidavit obtained by City Press, the teenager says she was “never in love” with her father, but had a “friends-with-benefits relationship.” “We didn’t have a normal father-and-daughter relationship, but rather a sexual relationship. “Me and dad and my sister were in the Cape at the end of 2017. Since we came back from the Cape, things started to happen between me and my dad. The fact is that my dad and I spent a lot of time together and we became very attached to each other. We connected with each other. “I am not in love with my dad. I love him, but we had a sexual relationship. I can’t remember everything we did. A lot of stuff happened, adult stuff. It feels weird to say it now. My father asked me to marry him. He said we will have a life together and will be together forever.” She revealed how the two exchanged nude pictures: “I sent my father naked photos of myself and he also sent of himself. Sometimes he asked for photos, other times I just sent him naked photos of myself. I also saw him naked quite a lot and he also saw me naked. We did those things at his house almost every weekend. “I was also naked many times and in the bath when we video-called each other. We kissed each other and other stuff. Like I said, it was friends with benefits,” the teenager said. The police detective said when the man was arrested he was found with nine cellphones and more than 900 nude pictures. The affidavit also provides graphic details of how the man bought his daughter condoms, lubricants and emergency contraception pills. A private investigator from Unchain Our Children, a non-governmental organisation fighting child trafficking, said the man had leased a cottage for his daughter in Boksburg. “We realised that there were a lot of wrong things because he had told the owners of the property that she was his fiancée,” the investigator said, adding that he became involved with the case after the teenager ran away from home and her mother reported her missing. “We had a pretty good idea that she could be with the father. When we entered the cottage we found condoms, provocative clothing, sexual lubricants, Viagra, morning-after pills and other sexual performance enhancing products. “We also found thousands of graphic messages on their phones. They had been sending the messages to each other.” The investigator said the man had fathered the 10-year-old daughter, whom he lived with, with a different woman. “Thank God medical records reveal that he had not slept with her yet, but he was also in the process of grooming her. She has also been taken to a place of safety,” the investigator said. “He will face more charges of grooming a child for sex when he appears in court on July 23.” 