Global peacefulness improved for the first time in five years – but the world continues to be less peaceful than it was a decade ago. The average level of global peacefulness improved slightly last year according to this year’s Global Peace Index. The average country score improved by -0.09%, with 86 countries improving and 76 recording deteriorations. Iceland remains the most peaceful country in the world, a position it has held since 2008. It is joined at the top of the index by New Zealand, Austria, Portugal and Denmark. Bhutan recorded the largest improvement of any country in the top 20, rising 43 places in the past 12 years. Afghanistan is now the least peaceful country in the world, replacing Syria, which is now the second-least peaceful. South Sudan, Yemen and Iraq comprise the remaining five least peaceful countries. Four of the nine regions in the world improved in peacefulness this year: Russia and Eurasia, Asia-Pacific, Europe, and the Middle East and north Africa. Europe maintained its position as the most peaceful region in the world, while the Middle East and north Africa remained the least peaceful region for the fifth year, although it did become more peaceful last year. Central America and the Caribbean had the largest regional deterioration.  Despite the improvement this year, the world remains considerably less peaceful now than a decade ago, with the average level of peacefulness deteriorating by 3.78% since 2008. A wide range of factors drove the fall in peacefulness over the past decade, including increased terrorist activity, the intensification of conflicts in the Middle East, rising regional tension in eastern Europe and northeast Asia, and increasing numbers of refugees and heightened political tension in Europe and the US. The economic effect of violence on the global economy last year amounted to $14.1 trillion (R198 trillion) in constant purchasing power parity terms. This is equivalent to 11.2% of the world’s GDP, or $1 853 a person. For the first time, the index includes research on the climate crisis and peace. The effect of the fluctuating climate on societal stability and its potential to lead to violent conflict is becoming increasingly important. The effects of climate shocks on factors such as resource scarcity, livelihood security and displacement can greatly increase the risk of future violent conflict, even when the climate crisis does not directly cause conflict. An estimated 971 million people live in areas with a high or very high exposure to climate hazards. Of this number, 41% reside in countries with low levels of peacefulness, while 22% are in countries with high levels of peace. – Vision of Humanity