The ANC’s national executive committee has resolved to disband the party’s youth league and North West provincial executive committee in its meeting over the weekend. The party’s secretary-general, Ace Magashule, made the announcement on Tuesday during a press briefing and cited “the end of its mandate” as the reason for the youth league’s dissolution. The provincial executive committee was disbanded because of deep divisions and instability that had since “impacted on governance” in the province, according to Magashule. “The national executive committee noted that the ANC in the North West remains weak, divided and unstable, which has impacted on governance. The national executive committee agreed to dissolve the provincial executive committee, whose mandate has come to an end, and appoint a provincial interim committee in accordance with the Constitution, to implement the process,” said Magashule. He added that: “Since its mandate has come to an end, the national executive committee dissolved the ANC Youth League national executive committee and appointed a national youth task team to oversee the process of rebuilding of the youth league.” Magashule revealed that the task team was to be convened by Thandi Mahambehlala, along with coordinator Sibongile Besani. They had been tasked with implementing a programme of action for the youth league, and to work with the progressive youth alliance and other youth formations to ensure a successful national congress would be held no later than January 31 2020. The task team would be assisted by former youth league leaders Zizi Kodwa, Malusi Gigaba and Fikile Mbalula. Other prominent figures in the ANC roped into stabilise the youth league are Pule Mabe, Daqkota Legoete, Faith Muthambi, Ronald Lamola and David Masondo. Outgoing youth league president Collen Maine and treasurer Reggie Nkabinde have also been retained into the task team. Read: ANC Youth League fights to live Spokesperson of the Revive ANCYL Movement, Thabo Mabotja, welcomed the national executive committee’s decision to disband the organisation in line with the call they have been making but criticised the national executive committee for not appointing younger people. “We have noted the decision of the ANC national executive committee – as announced in the post national executive committee statement. We welcome the decision to correctly disband what was now an unconstitutional leadership with a glaring inability to provide credible political and organisational leadership to the ANCYL.” “We are, however, absolutely bewildered by the decision by the national executive committee to appoint an ANC team to take charge of the affairs of the ANCYL. Our view is that this decision is against the political momentum that we are currently galvanising towards the revival of a credible and independent ANCYL,” said Mabotja. Magashule said it was pertinent to give young people positions of power, however, doing so by including them in the task team would not suffice. “This is a temporary formation and we decided against including any of the young people who would be going against each other in the National Congress of the youth league as some would have used the platform to canvass support and give them an unfair advantage,” said Magashule.   