  The ANC has condemned the physical acts of intimidation
directed by EFF MPs towards Public Enterprises Minister Parvin Gordhan in
Parliament on Thursday during his departmental budget speech. ANC national spokesperson Pule Mabe on Friday described the
actions of the EFF as “unacceptable” and contrary to the “culture and ethos of
this country”. “The ANC noted with grave concern the physical acts of
intimidation by the EFF Members of Parliament against Minister of Public
Enterprises Pravin Gordhan in Parliament yesterday during his departmental
budget speech.” “The actions of the EFF fly in the face of the democratic
culture and ethos of our country, of which Parliament is its highest
embodiment,” read the statement released by Mabe. He urged the EFF to use the parliamentary platform to try
and win support for its views through debate or deliberation, instead of using
physical intimidation. “In their usual fashion, they resorted to intimidation and
undermining the decorum of Parliament,” said Mabe. He further urged parliamentary leaders to “act decisively”
against those who perpetrate physical intimidation. “Comrade Gordhan, an ANC deployee like any other Member of
Parliament, must be protected from physical intimidation so that he is able to
fulfil his duties as a public representative and minister,” he said. In a bid to prevent Gordhan from presenting his budget
speech, members of the EFF labelled him a “constitutional delinquent” and
approached him at the podium, a move roundly condemned by all other parties in
the House. Gordhan stood his ground throughout the fracas and even
dared them to lay their hands on him. After the EFF members were thrown out of the proceedings,
the minister said: “What you’ve witnessed is a defence of state capture because
one must ask what [it is] that motivates ordinary Members of Parliament to
engage in such intimidatory tactics. And the question you, ourselves and the
public must ask, is: ‘What do they have to hide?’” He added that he was undeterred by such actions. “Intimidation of this kind, let me say very clearly and
categorically, is not going to intimidate me and stop us from fighting the good
fight.”  