A dairy factory founded by a family of straight-talking South African-Greek pizza moguls and their Drakensberg farming partners is under scrutiny by environmental authorities. Fred Kockott and PS Raju report. Ambush inspections are just one of an arsenal of measures environmental and waste management authorities have deployed to monitor alleged unlawful activities of a highly lucrative and successful dairy operation in the southern Drakensberg. Flour, yeast and water are some of the main ingredients that go into making pizzas. None of these is expensive, but then there’s the cheese. It was presumably with lowering this key input cost in mind that the founder of the successful Roman’s Pizza chain invested in a new dairy in Underberg five years ago. The Nicolakakis family formed a joint venture with Underberg farmers to produce quality cheese in a factory they helped establish in KwaZulu-Natal’s southern Drakensberg, where a number of dairy farmers had been struggling to stay afloat. The plan was to source milk from the region’s farmers and then at lower costs than from other dairies, turn it into affordable cheese, taking on what current Roman’s Pizza chief executive Bonnie Cooper describes as an “oligopolistic market”. Today, Underberg Dairy buys about 5 million litres of milk from more than 14 local farmers each month and produces on average 550 tons of mozzarella, cheddar and Gouda cheese. In the process, it has created hundreds of jobs and provided a healthy fillip for the Underberg economy. Last year, the dairy had a turnover of more than R400 million, according to its managers.  Steve Roberts, managing director of Underberg Dairy, said: “This is a profoundly good story – the building of a factory in a rural area, funded by farmers and Roman’s Pizza and the upliftment of people who have risen from nothing to become cheese-makers, operators, managers, drivers and administrators. “We pay well above the minimum wage, offer free transport and meals, and recently financed the setting up of an emergency medical service as a nonprofit service to the community,” said Roberts. But it’s not all good news. Those mountains of cheese have also brought the dairy’s managers a major compliance headache. The factory, tucked away in the Mondi forest plantations outside Underberg, stinks. It has expanded, unlawfully, beyond its capacity to effectively manage all its waste, including about 48 000 litres of whey a day. Although whey is not toxic, and can be used as fertiliser and animal feed, dumping it harms the environment, particularly when it gets into waterways, ultimately robbing streams, rivers and dams of oxygen. Roberts said that, until recently, the whey had been “spread” as liquid fertiliser on farms according to established protocols used in the US. That was until it was discovered that a licence was required to do so. Roberts said it was now being supplied to farmers to feed their pigs. “We truck it at great expense and do not charge for the whey,” said Roberts.  While he insists that “spreading” the whey on farms in the area had not caused harm, a local dairy farmer has called on authorities to conduct inspections on farms where whey has allegedly been dumped. The farmer, who asked not to be named, provided GroundUp with pictures of whey disposal on a farm in the Franklyn area in January. “The pics I sent show trucks pouring liquid in one spot. Nobody applies fertiliser like that,” said the farmer. “This was happening all over the district, sometimes on farms more than 100km away from Underberg Dairy.” The farmer said he had withdrawn from the Underberg Dairy consortium when concerns arose about the waste plant design and the impact the factory would have on local water supplies. “The factory got up and running very quickly and then started expanding without the correct authorisations. Water started to run out,” said the farmer. “It has been an environmental disaster from start to finish. Underberg is a pristine area and will be damaged.” The department of water and sanitation, and the KwaZulu-Natal department of economic development, tourism and economic affairs confirmed that alleged unlawful activities were being investigated. Sibongeseni Sosibo, the control environmental officer of the KwaZulu-Natal department of economic development, tourism and economic affairs, said legal notices had been served on the firm’s directors to rectify problems or face closure and prosecution for flouting the law. Sosibo confirmed that most of the problems related to unlawful expansion of the plant. He said that, at the last meeting with the dairy, it was “agreed that all unlawful activities” would be covered by specialist studies to “identify impacts and establish mitigation measures”. This included independent investigations into ground water contamination, air pollution and the impact of whey disposal on farms in the area, he said. Independent environmental consultant Nature Stamp has been appointed by Underberg Dairy to conduct these specialist studies and ensure compliance. Sosibo said “surprise ambushes” with others, including the department of water and sanitation and Ezemvelo KZN Wildlife, would also be used to monitor whey disposal. “Should contraventions be detected, appropriate enforcement action will be taken,” said Sosibo. Under the National Environmental Management Act, the directors risk a fine of up to R5 million or 10 years in jail. According to Cooper, the dairy directors are Roberts, Lucy Lamb, who is described as a manager of “Berg Dairies” in her LinkedIn profile, Arthur Nicolakakis and his son Ioannis Nicolakakis. Arthur is the founder of Roman’s Pizza. Ioannis is a serial entrepreneur who was the managing director of the pizza chain until recently. He took over the reins of the family business in 2001 at the age of 23. He is credited with driving its ten-fold expansion, but not without controversy along the way. According to the Sunday World in 2015, the equality court ordered Roman’s Pizza to pay R200 000 and publicly apologise to a Durban Hindu family for being refused a licence to operate a halaal franchise of the pizza chain because they were not Muslim. More recently, Ioannis was recorded in a telephone conversation making threatening remarks to a business rival in the Eastern Cape. He told them he would “f***ing burn them down” and “go to war with them”. Cooper, who recently took on the hot seat as Roman’s Pizza’s new chief executive, said they were monitoring the situation at Underberg Dairy closely. She said she was confident that alleged unlawful activities, if any, would be resolved by Underberg Dairy working closely with the department of water and sanitation, and the KwaZulu-Natal department of economic development tourism and economic affairs, as well as with a number of experts. Acknowledging that mistakes had been made, Roberts was incensed that a local farmer had turned to the media to address problems. “Our unexpected rapid growth has meant that we’ve outgrown our initial licencing requirements, but we have acknowledged this and initiated the necessary amendments with the relevant government departments,” said Roberts. “As farmers, we are all working together. Our success has benefited the entire dairy farming community in the region; in fact, the entire community. It is regrettable that the ‘local farmer’ did not approach us directly to verify the truth.” Two other high-profile farmers said they were glad the media was on top of the story and welcomed the action being taken by authorities. They said most local farmers were reluctant to speak out as Underberg was a close-knit community and the dairy bought all their milk supplies. They said that while the environmental impact was serious and needed to be addressed, closing the factory would not be in anyone’s best interests. . This story was produced for City Press by Roving Reporters. Raju is a former teacher enrolled in Roving Reporters’ environmental journalism training programme, Developing Environmental Watchdogs. Kockott is the founding director of Roving Reporters. Go to rovingreporters.co.za for more