Emotional, enthralling, eclectic and enlightening, the Johnny Clegg memorial on Friday at the Sandton Convention Centre was a fitting tribute to a singular icon. Former president Kgalema Motlanthe and his wife, the Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture Nathi Mthethwa and artists, including, the likes of Jessica Mbangeni, Danny K, David Kau and Karen Zoid were among those who were present to pay their respects to the legacy that the widely acclaimed musician has left behind. The program director, internationally acclaimed actor and voice artist John Kani oversaw the proceedings with a humorous, but nonetheless emotional, grace. “Whenever I saw Johnny Clegg, I saw myself, I saw my culture and I saw an African,” said Mthethwa. It would not be a fitting memorial without gripping musical performances. This part of the programme was kicked off with a heart-warming and moving song, I’ve Been Looking, by Jesse Clegg, accompanied by the Soweto Gospel Choir, dedicated to his late father. “He was a loving and generous role model for my brother and I. He taught us to be curious about the world and shape our lives around our passions. He believed that the greatest gift a father could give his son is a strong moral compass. Ultimately it is impossible for me to sum up what my dad was to my mother, my brother and me, but writing this song together was a wonderful memory that we shared,” Jesse said. Former bandmate and close friend of the late musician, Sipho Mchunu, left his heart on the stage in a very emotional eulogy and tribute performance. “uJohnny ube yinto yonke kimi,” he said, which translates as “Johnny meant everything to me.” Other stirring performances include a rendition of Asimbonanga by the award-winning singer-songwriter Zolani Mahola, also accompanied by the Soweto Gospel Choir, that had fans on their feet. There was also a performance by various artists of Clegg’s hit single The Crossing, which ended the ceremony on a comforting note. Max du Preez, one of the speakers, captured the mood when he said that Clegg’s music was and is a reflection of what we should aspire to be as a society. “He went where others were too scared and ignorant to go. He did so with great enthusiasm, innocence, an open heart and a love for humanity,” said the veteran journalist and editor.  