Activists are up in arms with pharmaceutical giant GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) over its request to test a vaccine with a modified chimpanzee virus on six-month-old South African babies. However, medical professionals say the vaccine could save many lives if it is effective. The vaccine is for the paediatric respiratory syncytial virus (RSV), which is highly infectious and to which children of a young age are particularly vulnerable. The virus causes throat and nasal infections, which can lead to bronchitis and pneumonia. Because the vaccine contains a genetically modified organism (GMO), GSK is required to follow an additional public consultation process in South Africa. The GMO is the virus itself, which only chimpanzees can get, and which is modified to cause a reaction in babies, so that they will develop antibodies for human RSV. Rincert Moremi, the spokesperson for the department of agriculture, forestry and fisheries – which is responsible for public participation related to GMOs in South Africa – said this is the first application for a GMO-vaccine that it has received. The time-period open to the public for commentary ended recently, said Moremi, and the department received 346 emails with objections, which are now being considered. Rob Hutchinson, of Dear South Africa, a nongovernmental organisation which facilitates public participation in parliamentary processes, said it had received 8 877 representations from the public which it was ready to hand over. “Of the 8 877, 669 were in favour of the GMO tests, 277 were decided, and 7 931 were against it,” said Hutchinson. Some were furious about the project. “Why would anyone agree to use their baby as a guinea pig?” wrote a person named Janeke in her submission. Another, identified only as Taryn, was opposed to the use of Africa’s residents as “laboratory rats”. But GSK spokesperson Andy McGuffie said that South Africa, along with Chris Hani Baragwanath Hospital in Soweto – the proposed testing site – would not be first. Clinical tests worldwide have already been conducted on 73 adults (aged 18 to 45) and 82 babies of about one year old. The study of six to seven-month-old babies is the next step and will take place in 17 countries. Permission has already been obtained in 11 of them, namely the US, Canada, Belgium, Spain, Italy, Finland, Poland, Panama, Turkey, the UK and Thailand. Among the countries that GSK is still awaiting permission are South Africa, Brazil, Australia, Argentina and Mexico. McGuffie said there is currently no vaccine for RSV available, and because the virus is so common in poor and developing countries, they want to develop a product that can save the lives of babies. Because the vaccine will be administered to children who are likely not to have had the RSV infection before, there are possible side-effects that GSK may yet be unaware of, said McGuffie. Those that GSK already knows about include pain, redness and swelling around the area where the vaccine is administered, as well as fever, irritability, fatigue and a lack of appetite. Professor Robin Green, the head of paediatrics and child health at the University of Pretoria, said RSV was a massive problem in South Africa. “Every year, between February and July, we have hundreds of babies who contract chest infections as a result of it. Even adults and elderly people can be affected. Many of the children require hospitalisation and may even be admitted to high-care units. Some children die as a result of the infection.” He pointed out that all clinical tests are strictly controlled to make them as safe as possible and are subject to various ethical processes. Green said that if the vaccination was effective, it could save many lives. Professor Marietjie Venter, of the University of Pretoria’s department of virology, said that using a human virus for the vaccination was unsustainable. She has been researching RSV for over 14 years. “GSK use an adenovirus [a group of viruses that cause respiratory illness], which is very similar to a human adenovirus but comes from another species (chimpanzees) – which weaken it severely so that it cannot replicate, and they [GSK] add RSV surface proteins,” she said. “To the human body, the virus looks like RSV, but in reality, it cannot make people sick. The reason a human adenovirus is not used is that most people have already had it and the immune system would immediately deactivate it.” The eventual goal is to add an effective RSV vaccine to the current battery of vaccines. According to the department of health’s current vaccination schedule, every child must have 19 vaccinations before the age of 12.