Following Friday’s Twitter war between the premier and finance minister, the party is set on reining in MPs who engage in hostile social media exchanges. Finance Minister Tito Mboweni, Premier David Makhura, Ekurhuleni Mayor Mzwandile Masina and Human Settlements MEC Lebogang Maile have agreed to be part of an urgent meeting where they are expected to iron out their e-toll squabble. “This is what we encourage. We want our comrades to use appropriate platforms so that when they communicate with society they communicate a message that inspires hope to society,” ANC spokesperson Pule Mabe said. President Cyril Ramaphosa has mandated Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula, Mboweni and Makhura to submit a solution to the “impasse” around electronic tolling on Gauteng freeways. In a statement issued yesterday, he said the recent public exchanges between Mboweni and the Gauteng provincial government were unfortunate and deeply regrettable. This follows Friday’s “match-up” on social media between Mboweni, Makhura and Maile. Mabe said it was “worrying” that members of the governing party were using social media to “compromise” the party when there were alternative channels to engage in robust debate. “We are calling on all our members and on our deployees in various positions of responsibility to please desist from such conduct and communicate messages that bring our people together.” Mboweni caused a Twitter storm when he stated that a plan was supposed to be in place to ensure returns on investment regarding road upgrades in Gauteng. “So, when you invest in a toll road infrastructure, you expect a return for many years ahead as per contract. Right? Not the cost of your investment today. Future returns,” the minister said in a tweet on Friday. He later tweeted: “As one grows up, something so obvious and simple starts to make lots of sense. Always be alert and sensitive when talking to people. Be careful that you may, inadvertently, cause pain to someone. Measure your words.” Makhura hit back, also on Friday, telling Mboweni that he would be engaging with Mbalula and Ramaphosa on the matter. “Minister Tito Mboweni can continue to tweet as he cooks; he is a minister, not the president,” the premier said. Maile sided with Makhura and reprimanded Mboweni for being “disrespectful, ill-disciplined and obsessed with himself”. “We are not scared of you, bring it on. We will defeat you with your neoliberal tendencies,” Maile tweeted. Masina tweeted: “People of Gauteng must stand up in support of the @GautengANC and @davidmakhura on the issue of e-toll against any rouge [sic] elements in society. Our future is without e-tolls in GP period.” Mboweni’s tweets also caught the attention of ANC Gauteng spokesperson Tasneem Motara, who said she had had a conversation with Mboweni. “We had a good back and forth on the e-toll issue. He stubbornly stands by his position and well [sic] so do we as the PEC [provincial executive committee]. He has agreed to wait for the invite to the PEC meeting where we will enlighten each other,” she tweeted.