Institutions of higher learning were flooded by long queues of students – many of whom weren’t registered to vote at the campuses. Although the IEC presiding officers declined to comment on the number of registered voters they did agree that a challenge they faced was an overwhelming number of voters who weren’t registered at the campus coming to vote and having to accommodate them. University students, who are in the middle of or are preparing for exams, stood in line – some with their textbooks and laptops in hand – excited to experience what was for many a first-time vote. Read: Hopeful young people vote to be heard in Alex, the disillusioned stay home On top of the list of priorities in the student community when deciding on who they were to vote for was free education, the availability of accommodation and the prospects of employment and job security. First-time voter and second-year education student at the University of Johannesburg, Makgethwa Diketane (23), was 10 people away from the voting station. She said she was uncertain which party she would vote for but would consider the manifesto of the parties to accommodate poor people and provide access to education. Final year Wits law student Mpendulo Mfeka (24) remarked that his vote had been decided and unchanged in the last three elections. “In my view the party I will be voting for has made great strides where issues of accommodation and funding are concerned and these affect the student community directly. There is great room for improvement but I believe my unchanged vote for this party will serve as opportunity to give them more room to serve the people of this nation. I have the highest confidence in my vote.” Two students described the mistakes of the government as being unforgivable and influential in who they would vote for. First year bachelor of science student Sivuyile Mhatu said he would be voting for a party that prioritised black people. “I am voting for a party that will put the struggles of black people first. Because my struggles as a black person have always come after the struggles of white people – if they have any – and those of Indian and coloured people. Young people are tired of the Mandela fallacy and we will use this election to demonstrate that.” David Raphunga, a BCom accounting student from the University of Johannesburg, said he was confident his party would gain majority in at least four provinces.  “I am a young person practising my democratic right to vote and you know, looking at 1994 – that election and the hope it represented in us getting political power versus implementation from the government to the Marikana massacre and the dire conditions in Alexandra township – my vote is very clear. I am voting for a party that will get us – black people – our dignity back.” Policy and reform were also subject matters voters in institutions of higher learning said they were considering. Jabulani Sello, a Wits master’s student in geology, said he was glad to be exercising his right to vote and added that the “party that will reform the mining charter and prioritise the land issue” would get his vote. Many more students stood in line few in party colours and many claimed that they were uncertain about who they would vote for. Others commented that they were not certain who to vote for but were still adamant they would add their voice through the ballot paper and take a picture of their inked thumb to add to social media trends.    