Gauteng premier David Makhura has announced a radically changed provincial executive in which a number of previous MECs do not feature. These include Ismail Vadi, Nandi Mayathula-Khoza, Uhuru Moiloa, Sizakele Malobane and Gwen Ramokgopa. If you include the fact that former health MEC Qedani Mahlangu already lost her job and that the likes of former health MEC Brian Hlongwa are also no longer in the leadership in the legislature, then you get a sense that there has been a shake-up in the Gauteng leadership, which had been steady over the years. City Press understands that former Johannesburg mayor Parks Tau, who was expected to be MEC, is likely to be appointed in the national executive set to be announced by President Cyril Ramaphosa. Makhura has brought in six new, and mostly young, faces in former Tshwane mayor Kgosientso Ramokgopa as MEC for Economic Development, Agriculture and Environment, Mbali Hlophe as MEC for Sport, Arts, Culture and Recreation, Dr Bandile Masuku as MEC for Health, Nomantu Nkomo-Ralehoko as MEC for Education, Thuliswa Nkabinde-Khawe as MEC for Social Development and Tasneem Motara as MEC for Infrastructure Development and Property Management No single MEC has kept their previous posts. This has even led to a public outcry about Panyaza Lesufi who excelled as education MEC and has now been promoted to finance and e-government. This follows the departure of former finance MEC Barbara Creecy to the National Assembly. Social media was abuzz on Wednesday morning with many posting that Lesufi should have been allowed to continue the good work he was doing in education. Read: Makhura's new council 'reflects the ANC alliance in Gauteng' Others said he should have been moved to national office to be education minister. However, a government official said: “People must not behave as if Panyaza can only be good in education.” He said that Creecy needed to be replaced with a senior person and that Lesufi as an experienced MEC and deputy chairperson of the ANC in Gauteng met that criteria. “Makhura could not take the risk of replacing him with someone completely new.” The ANC in Gauteng barely held on to the province in last month’s elections, winning just over 50% of votes. There is a 50/50 gender split in the executive after the national leadership allowed the province to not implement a 60/40 balance in favour of women.  *Panyaza Lesufi: MEC for Finance and e-Government* *Nomantu Nkomo-Ralehoko (Ms): MEC for Education* *Faith Mazibuko (Ms): MEC for Community Safety* *Lebogang Maile: MEC for Human Settlements, Urban Planning and COGTA* *Thuliswa Nkabinde-Khawe (Ms): MEC for Social Development* *Jacob Mamabolo: MEC for Public Transport and Road Infrastructure* *Tasneem Motara (Ms): MEC for Infrastructure Development and Property Management* *Dr Kgosientso Ramokgopa: MEC for Economic Development,Agriculture and Environment* *Mbali Hlophe (Ms): MEC for Sport, Arts, Culture and Recreation* *Dr Bandile Masuku: MEC for Health Gauteng premier   