The Alliance for Transformation for All (ATA), a political party formed mainly by taxi operators last year to contest the national elections with the view to transform the taxi industry, says “the people must govern now”. Sabelo Dumezweni, the presidential spokesperson, said the “shall” in the Freedom Charter postponed the need for people to govern – but in the ATA the people govern now. We meet Dumezweni and the ATA’s founding president Mangaliso Jafta at the Dutywa Bus Rank in the Eastern Cape. A group of ATA activists have gathered before they embark on a campaign at the Dutywa Main Rank used by taxi operators. After exchanging some pleasantries we jumped into a taxi, a Toyota Quantum branded with the ATA colours and with a bold sign, “Road to change, Vote ATA”, next to the party’s current president, Ntsikelelo Gaehler. The main rank is not a dedicated taxi rank, but a space on Richardson Road which was turned into a taxi rank. The street is lined with taxis and, despite being the second-busiest street in the town, it is used as a rank and ordinary cars have to deal with the delays if they use it. As we hit the taxi rank, ATA volunteers wearing white T-shirts get quickly to work distributing flyers and encouraging passing motorists to vote for their fledgling party. Jafta and Dumezweni talk to potential voters, including hawkers at the rank, who are their main target. Nomvuyo Dlamini (52), a hawker, demands that Jafta give her a T-shirt. She won’t take no for an answer. “Kudala ndisifuna esi skipa ningandiniki, sapha esi skipa, khulula esi usinxibileyo xa ungenaso esinye onokundinika sona,” said Dlamini, which loosely translated means, I have been asking for this T-shirt from you for a while now. If you don’t have one that you can give me, you must take off the one that you are wearing. After a moment of hesitation, Jafta gives in and takes off his T-shirt and hands it to Dlamini who promptly puts it on and joins the singing party members, who are hauling up a party banner as they continue with their blitz campaign in Dutywa. “I love this organisation because they are here at the rank with us where I work. I have no choice but to vote for them. They need my support because the issues that they are raising affect us as hawkers and taxi operators directly,” Dlamini said. Party supporters sing: “Zizojika izinto, wena ukhalalelani, thula mntanam, isikhalo sika ATA sihoye, thula mntanam.” Then we are back in the taxi where we try to conduct the interview. Jafta insists we find a place which is quiet so that we can avoid the noise at the rank. He takes us to a guesthouse. Jafta said one of the reasons ATA was formed was because of the issue of subsidies for taxi operators, which the government had failed to provide, unlike others in the transport industry. “It looks like we are competing with the government because they are not giving us subsidy in the taxi industry while giving buses, for instance, subsidies, such as the AB 350 buses which are subsidised by the government with R48 000 a month on the same route and the same commuters. “That AB 350 is a company owned by ordinary people the same way taxi bosses own minibuses and, because they are subsidised, it means they have an unfair advantage. We want a subsidy because it brings security. You can even have a fixed salary for drivers. You cannot do that when there is no guarantee that you will have commuters or not,” said Jafta. Because their taxi rank is on the street and there are no toilets for commuters, Dumezweni said they use the toilets at a nearby garage where people pay R2. “There are many things we need which we don’t have here. In the whole of Dutywa there is not one single taxi rank. The bus rank where we met is the only rank here in town and it is for buses. There is not a single one for us. “It’s as if we do not exist. That is why we formed ATA so that we can deal with our interests ourselves,” he said. Dumezweni said the state of roads in Dutywa left a lot to be desired. He said they would have loved to campaign in the villages around Dutywa but they could not because of the terrible state of the roads. Jafta said ATA was an alliance of everybody, including taxi associations, farmers, hawkers, businesspeople and traditional leaders. “When you speak to a hawker, for instance, she is not going to speak about a subsidy, she would say she does not have a shelter; there are no toilets and she does not have a permit to sell,” he said. Jafta is a former ANC member and speaker of the Mbhashe municipality, who was fired by the governing party and joined the Congress of the People after the 2007 Polokwane conference. Jafta was one of the ANC members who was not happy about the removal of former president Thabo Mbeki and started to defy the organisation, which then led to a disciplinary process that resulted in them being expelled. Jafta is not a taxi boss. “I was approached by people in the industry who wanted me to start a political organisation that would have everyone’s interests, not just the taxi industry, at heart. It got to a point when they said they did not have an interest in who was running the country as long as they could find people who were able to,” he said. Another problem they had, he said, was the appointment of ministers “who do not understand the transport industry”. “Take for instance Blade Nzimande: He does not have any background in the transport industry which means for six months he would have to be oriented. Even previous ministers had no transportation knowledge, that is where the problem lies,” he said. Jafta said the Eastern Cape was ATA’s stronghold, as well as the Western Cape where they launched their manifesto. Others are Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal. He said the party was counting on the might of the taxi industry, “which has 535 000 taxi owners around the country, to see the vision of ATA”. Jafta said the party’s presence would most likely be felt in the local government elections, and that the national elections were just an opportunity for them to test the waters. Dumezweni said the number of taxi drivers was five times more than the 535 000 taxi owners. If all these people, including their families, voted ATA, the party would be a real force to be reckoned with. “This is our base. But what we know is that people would not simply go one side at once. “We are optimistic that, come May 8, we will have a significant effect in the elections and in the future of the country,” said Dumezweni, who is a lawyer.    