His resignation this week comes as the governing body faces a host of court cases. In a drama-filled week, Safa’s head of legal affairs, Tebogo Motlanthe, spent two days in a jail cell after he was arrested at OR Tambo International Airport last Saturday – and then, on Tuesday, dropped a bombshell by resigning from the national football governing body. Motlanthe and Safa’s acting chief executive officer (CEO), Russell Paul, confirmed the resignation, but it has since emerged that the two parties are set to “sit down” tomorrow to discuss the matter. According to highly placed sources in the organisation, the purpose of tomorrow’s meeting is to try to convince Motlanthe to rescind his resignation. But a source close to the goings-on, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said: “There is no way he is going back. They can beg him until they are blue in the face. He has had it and has his mind is set on leaving.” Motlanthe’s unexpected resignation is set to throw Safa into turmoil as it tries to deal with a number of serious court cases, including the PSL’s challenge against it for concluding the OUTsurance referee sponsorship without consulting the league; the case involving Fli-Afrika Travel; and the dragging legal challenge brought against it by its former CEO, Lesley Sedibe. In addition, there are urgent football matters to deal with, such as yesterday’s arbitration in the case involving the NSL against its affiliate, NFD side Tshakhuma Tsha Madzivhandila. May is also the last month of the season. It is usually the busiest period, with protests coming in thick and fast as clubs from different divisions try to get boardroom decisions to either gain promotion or avoid relegation. Motlanthe’s resignation has fuelled the speculation, rife in football circles, that the legal eagle, who was admitted as an advocate in January last year, is headed to the PSL. But Motlanthe flatly denied this. “I am not going to the PSL,” he told City Press. “They have been talking to me since the current prosecutor, Nande Becker, was served notice. I just want to stay away from football for a bit. I am joining a friend and former schoolmate who has an established practice as I want to go into private practice.” Prior to this, City Press has learnt, after a lengthy period of courting him, the PSL had finally made Motlanthe an attractive offer that he’d found difficult to turn down. If past experiences are anything to go by, there may be some truth to that speculation, so watch this space. Motlanthe confirmed his dramatic arrest at OR Tambo airport, which occurred on his return from a CAF workshop in Uganda last Saturday. “I was confronted by the police at the airport and arrested. I was in the company of [Safa executive member] Poobie Govindasamy, [former Safa boss] Molefi Oliphant and Phindile Dlamini from the PSL,” he said. “I spent two nights at the Brixton Police Station cells and was released on Monday. The case was dropped because there was no case to answer. I didn’t appear in court, but I was represented by my lawyer.” He said the fraud he was charged with stemmed from last year, when his ID was used to purchase some “motor parts” and “oil” for an amount of about R100 000. “Surprisingly, the case was opened at Langlaagte Police Station some time last year, but an Interpol notice was issued on Friday – after I had left the country on Thursday on football duty.” He said he had his suspicions about the origins of this fracas, but could not divulge further details. City Press has also learnt that the PSL plans to outsource its disciplinary process. However, Motlanthe was to be based at their offices full time to prepare cases for the disciplinary committee. But this, along with the speculation on Motlanthe’s move to the PSL, could not be confirmed. Calls and SMSes sent to PSL acting CEO Mato Madlala yesterday went unanswered. Should the move happen, it might add to the already hostile relationship between Safa and the PSL, and compromise Motlanthe’s legal career, as he could find himself conflicted when the matters that are pending between the two organisations go to court.