Kingsley Makhubela writes about lessons learnt under principled and humble leaders and why SA needs to inculcate a culture of morality and servant leadership among those who occupy senior state positions The exile component of a revolution is often referred to as its advance detachment, because exiles had opportunities that those living under oppression did not, such as quality education. But those living under oppression expect much from exiles who return, such as quality leadership and morality. I was fortunate to have had the privilege of working under Oliver Reginald Tambo, an embodiment of quality leadership. When I left my home in Meadowlands, Soweto, in 1980 at the age of 19, I belonged to the ANC underground structures and was the chairman of the southern Transvaal region of the Congress of South African Students. I first went to Swaziland, then to Maputo, and later to Angola where I did my military training in camps in the east of the country where we were attacked by the rebel movement Unita. From there I went to Lusaka where I became Tambo’s chief bodyguard. Tambo was a fine example of quality leadership and revolutionary morality. He was also very humble. When we were in Ghana there was only one hotel room available for us, which had only one bed. No matter how much I argued that I would sleep on the floor, he insisted that we would alternate nights sleeping on the bed. Tambo refused to accept honorary recognitions by universities and cities around the world, and instead motivated that they be bestowed on Nelson Mandela and other Robben Island prisoners because he believed that would encourage them to keep fighting, even in prison. He had the rare attributes of both strategic and operational skill, and was able to mobilise international solidarity for the liberation struggle from the East and West, not only for South Africa, but for the entire African continent. The humility he displayed and that we come from is vastly at odds with the level of opulence displayed by party members during the leadership of former president Jacob Zuma, and today. Tambo refused to live a luxury life and never allowed any luxury in the ANC abroad. He drove a Peugeot 404 in Lusaka at a time when Thabo Mbeki was driving a small 1.4 Toyota Corolla. The Swedish government gave the ANC several Volvos, but Tambo refused to use them and instead gave them to the Zambian government. He said that if we enjoyed luxury and drove Mercedes Benzes and so on, we would stay in exile. When I lived in Zambia, all I received was a stipend of 14 kwacha a month, which was the equivalent of R14. In retrospect, this really helped – no-one was rich. The systems we had in the ANC at the time, and the leadership Tambo displayed, contained no greed, and no environment was created for it to thrive in. The questions I ponder when I look back at the last 25 years are what have we achieved as a country and what are our challenges, questions which require honest reflection, including about how the country came to be ranked the seventy-third least corrupt nation out of 175 countries by Transparency International. I believe good systems prevent greed and we need to go back to building a strong public service to stop it. You cannot rely on individuals; you need systems and processes, and people must go to jail if they are corrupt. If the systems work, it will stop. Building state capacity should be a continuous project anchored on a professional public service. Growing up in the ANC, we were taught the importance of the state, and the separation of party and state. At the core of ANC teaching is an emphasis that a state serves the general will. Checks and balances are essential regulatory mechanisms in successful democracies. Central to building the public service is education to enable our public servants to deal with complex and challenging dynamics in a viable and functioning state that cooperates and competes with others around the world. I was fortunate enough to have acquired a quality education for the public service. I also had exceptional mentors, such as former Department of International Relations and Cooperation Director-General Dr Ayanda Ntsaluba, who motivated me to study further while working at the highest level of public service. After completing a master’s degree in diplomatic studies, I did a PhD in political science at the University of Pretoria, where deputy dean of humanities Professor Maxi Schoeman was my academic mentor and coach. Attaining my exile dream of a quality education was made possible by Marthinus van Schalkwyk, my minister when I was director-general of the department of tourism, who gave me the support I needed during my PhD studies. He remains a good friend. The skills I acquired made me a better servant of our state. We need a better educated public service and quality leaders with a keen sense of morality to take us into the future. Makhubela has served as ambassador to Kenya and Portugal, and was the director-general of the department of tourism.He is the chief executive of Brand South Africa   TALK TO US What has your experience been of access to and achievement of an educational qualification? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword DREAM and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material