ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule says the party is going to direct all its deployees including ministers, premiers and mayors to toe the party line and learn to implement the ANC’s resolutions after the general elections. Speaking at a May Day rally in Katlehong, in Ekurhuleni, on Wednesday Magashule said ANC deployees should not take individual decisions. “Those deployees must then be directed by the party. Comrades, when they are mayors, ministers and premiers must not work individually. They must be directed by the ANC and its alliance component,” he said. Magashule said ANC’s candidates on the party’s election list for Parliament and provincial legislatures will be expected to implement party resolutions. “We must ensure that comrades who are members of the ANC and Cosatu and are on the list must not change when in Parliament. Those comrades in Parliament must implement the resolutions of the highest decision-making body, the national conference of the ANC so that we move as one.” He said the ANC does want to see privatisation after the elections. “If there is supposed to be anything we sit down with alliance partners.” Read: ANC calls for Malema to return Finance Minister Tito Mboweni was previously criticised by the trade union federation Cosatu for taking a stance that was not in line with the ANC’s policy resolutions taken at the party’s 54th national elective conference in Nasrec, south of Johannesburg, in December 2017. President Cyril Ramaphosa’ proposal, announced in his state of the nation address in February, to split Eskom into three units-transmission, power generation and distribution is seen by trade unions as a step towards privatisation. Magashule said the ANC must remain a true liberation movement and fulfil its promises. “If the ANC is a revolutionary movement the ANC must make sure throughout South Africa that there is in-sourcing so that workers don’t march. Let the ANC remain a true revolutionary movement.” Gauteng premier and ANC provincial chairperson David Makhura told workers at the rally that the provincial government is going to ensure that there is in-sourcing in every department and entity. “We are very committed to address every issue that the trade union brings to us. This is going to be done by every department and every entity in Gauteng province. It is a very important thing because workers who are casualised don’t get benefits.” Makhura said Democratic Alliance (DA)-led metros in Johannesburg and Tshwane were very hostile towards trade unions. He said workers have a lot to lose if the ANC loses power. “If you don’t believe it, ask the workers who are in Johannesburg and Tshwane. The DA administrations are very hostile to trade unions. The DA administration physiologically and ideologically doesn’t want trade unions in the municipalities that they govern,” Makhura said. Ekurhuleni mayor Mzwandile Masina said the ANC cannot afford to lose South Africa and Gauteng, which is the country’s economic hub in the election. “We can’t afford a coalition government. We must use our 25 years." 