Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) national chairperson advocate Dali Mpofu and party treasurer general Leigh-Ann Mathys will not be part of the 44 EFF members designated to represent the party in the National Assembly. This was revealed by EFF president Julius Malema on Thursday afternoon when the party held its first media briefing following its good showing in last week’s national and provincial elections. Malema did not mince his words when explaining why they two officials in the EFF’s top six where not going to feature in the sixth democratically elected parliament. “We deployed our national chair to the Eastern Cape there were no results. We had to take the deputy president from Mpumalanga to go and reinforce in the province because we were scared that if the Eastern Cape was not going to grow, it will then undermine every other growth everywhere in South Africa. With the deputy president in the province we now started experiencing growth”. “As you know the national chair is an advocate and his job demands that he constantly appear in court and this means that sometimes he cannot deliver as much as the party demands,” said Malema. The EFF leader added that Mathys on the other hand was not going to the national assembly because of ill health. The passionate Malema went on to say that post elections it was time for the party to deal with members not willing pull their weight to ensure that the EFF continues to do well in elections. “The people who are not adding value they must go. You add value or you ship out. It’s not about nurturing friendships; whoever didn’t do their job, there should be consequences. There might be 90% replacement of MPs representing the party as we are not in the business of sitting with dead wood,” said Malema. The EFF leader added that prior to the election there was a resolution reached with all municipal leaders that “they all had to buy bakkies” so that during the campaign period they could easily access rural areas and garner voters for the party. “There are, however, those who have chosen not to honour this and we have also received reports during the elections period that there are some within the party who hold positions of influence who were not going out to canvass votes and we will be looking into this,” said Malema. Following last week’s national and provincial elections in which the red berets grew its support by 4.44 percentage points the party gained 44 seats in parliament, a significant increase from the 25 that it achieved in 2014. 