President Cyril Ramaphosa has made good on his promise to trim the fat, announcing a leaner Cabinet of 28 ministries down from 36. Ramaphosa’s Cabinet for the sixth administration gave the first indication of what the reconfigured state will look like. There are a number of changes on the way so all eyes were on the composition of Cabinet, which grew to an alarming number in the previous administration. “Today, we are announcing some of the outcomes of the reconfiguration of national government,” Ramaphosa said in his address to the nation. “As I indicated in the state of the nation address in February 2018: ‘It is critical that the structure and size of the state is optimally suited to meet the needs of the people and ensure the most efficient allocation of public resources’. “In undertaking this review, we have been guided by the need to build a modern developmental state that has the means to drive economic and social transformation, to embrace innovation and to direct effort and resources towards where they will have the greatest impact. All South Africans are acutely aware of the great economic difficulties our country has been experiencing and the constraints this has placed on public finances. It is therefore imperative that in all areas and spheres of government, we place priority on revitalising our economy while exercising the greatest care in the use of public funds.” A number of ministries with similar mandates have been merged in order to get to 28 ministries. The merged ministries include: trade and industry with economic development, higher education and training with science and technology, environmental affairs with forestry and fisheries, agriculture with land reform and rural development, mineral resources with energy, human settlements with water and sanitation, and sports and recreation with arts and culture. Ramaphosa had given an earlier indication of these changes late last year when he appointed Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams as minister of communications and telecommunications and postal services. Before that, the two ministries existed separately. “We have also decided to add responsibility for infrastructure to the public works portfolio and to add responsibility for employment to the labour portfolio. If we are to make effective progress in building the South Africa that we all want, it is important that we deploy into positions of responsibility people who are committed, capable and hardworking, and who have integrity.” The newly minted members of the executive will be sworn in by Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng tomorrow. Deputy president: David Mabuza. Minister of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development: Thoko Didiza. Deputy ministers are Sdumo Dlamini and Mcebisi Skwatsha. Minister of Basic Education: Angie Motshekga. Deputy minister: Dr Regina Mhaule. Minister of Communications: Stella Ndabeni-Abrahams. Deputy minister: Pinky Kekana. Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs: Dr Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma. Deputy ministers are Parks Tau and Obed Bapela. Minister of Defence and Military Veterans: Nosiviwe Mapisa-Nqakula. Deputy minister: Thabang Makwetla. Minister of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries: Barbara Creecy. Deputy minister: Maggie Sotyu. Minister of Employment and Labour: Thulas Nxesi. Deputy minister: Boitumelo Moloi. Minister of Finance: Tito Mboweni. Deputy minister: Dr David Masondo. Minister of Health: Dr Zwelini Mkhize. Deputy minister: Dr Joe Phaahla. Minister of Higher Education, Science and Technology: Dr Blade Nzimande. Deputy minister: Buti Manamela. Minister of Home Affairs: Dr Aaron Motsoaledi. Deputy minister: Njabulo Nzuza. Minister of Human Settlements, Water and Sanitation: Lindiwe Sisulu. Deputy ministers are Pam Tshwete and David Mahlobo. Minister of International Relations and Cooperation: Dr Naledi Pandor. Deputy ministers are Alvin Botes and Candith Mashego-Dlamini. Minister of Justice and Correctional Services: Ronald Lamola. Deputy ministers are John Jeffery and Inkosi Phathekile Holomisa. Minister of Mineral Resources and Energy: Gwede Mantashe. Deputy minister: Bavelile Hlongwa. Minister of Police: General Bheki Cele. Deputy minister: Cassel Mathale. Minister in the Presidency: Jackson Mthembu. Deputy minister in the Presidency: Thembi Siweya. Minister in the Presidency for Women, Youth and Persons with Disabilities: Maite Nkoana-Mashabane. Deputy minister: Prof Hlengiwe Mkhize. Minister of Public Enterprises: Pravin Gordhan. Deputy minister: Phumulo Masualle. Minister of Public Service and Administration: Senzo Mchunu. Deputy minister: Sindy Chikunga. Minister of Public Works and Infrastructure: Patricia de Lille. Deputy minister: Noxolo Kiviet. Minister of Small Business Development: Khumbudzo Ntshavheni. Deputy minister: Rosemary Capa. Minister of Social Development: Lindiwe Zulu. Deputy minister: Henrietta Bogopane-Zulu. Minister of Sports, Arts and Culture: Nathi Mthethwa. Deputy minister: Nocawe Mafu. Minister of State Security: Ayanda Dlodlo. Deputy minister: Zizi Kodwa. Minister of Tourism: Nkhensani Kubayi-Ngubane. Deputy minister: Fish Mahlalela. Minister of Trade and Industry: Ebrahim Patel. Deputy ministers are Fikile Majola and Nomalungelo Gina. Minister of Transport: Fikile Mbalula. Deputy minister: Dikeledi Magadzi. 