South Africa should look to Northern Ireland to learn a few tricks on how to turn a cheerless and a gloomy history into a tourism gold mine. On April 2 1912 the brand sparkling new RMS Titanic left the Belfast harbour for Southampton, en route to New York. Shortly before midnight on the night of April 14, 12 days into her maiden voyage, the Titanic struck an iceberg and began sinking in ice cold waters. About three hours into the morning of April 15, one of the world’s most famous cruise ships ever built, carrying about 2224 passengers including the crew, sank in the North Atlantic Ocean. More than 1500 people perished in the accident which has been touted as one of history’s deadliest peacetime marine calamities. For a century, the story of the RMS Titanic remained a hideous blotch not only on Belfast which boasts a glowing maritime history, but also on JP Morgan, the illustrious and enigmatic American banker who financed the building of the cruise ship. For the better part of the 100 years ending in 2012, Northern Ireland, and Belfast in particular, was ashamed to be associated with the Titanic. It was a symbol of shame and the citizens of Ulster, a province of Northern Ireland, spoke about it in hushed tones. In April 2012, in an editorial marking the 100th anniversary of the sinking of the ship, the Belfast Telegraph noted that “for many years, the Titanic was not spoken about in Ulster”. Even “Titanic”, the 1997 epic tragedy by James Cameron’s decent attempt at retelling the story of the ill-fated liner failed to convince the people of Belfast that the ship’s narrative could be changed from being an all-enveloping dark saga into a story with a happy ending. In 2004, a series of partners, including Tourism Northern Ireland and the Belfast City Council decided to haul themselves out of their titanic self-pity cesspool. They hatched an idea to turn around the decidedly calamitous story of the titanic into a tourism bonanza. Three years after construction began, the Titanic Belfast was completed on the slipway of Harland and Wolff Shipyard, right where the RMS Titanic was built in 1912. The Titanic Belfast is an imposing R1.8-billion eight-storey museum documenting not only the fascinating ship’s grand designs and pioneering engineering, but also how Belfast developed from manufacturing rope and linen in the 1800s and peaking as the world’s biggest shipyards in the 1950s. Throwing R1.8 billion into a tourism facility that required some 300 000 annual visitors in order to break-even was a perilous gamble. But in its first year of operation, the museum smashed all records, attracting more than 800 000 visitors. Last year the museum recorded its busiest year, netting over 840 000 tourists. It helps a lot that the museum is located in the Titanic Quarter, a stretch of a prime waterfront piece of land which has seen multibillion-rand regeneration investments in recent years, thanks to efforts by Invest Northern Ireland. Invest IN is an agency of the Northern Ireland government whose task is to attract businesses to the country. But what does the Titanic museum have anything to do with South Africa? A lot, actually. South Africa’s history is identical to that of the RMS Titanic – ghastly and depressing. Just 25 years ago South Africa emerged from more than 400 years of pillaging, murder, rape and plunder by different generations of colonialists. It is a history that South Africans are not proud of. We are ashamed of our past. But like the people of Belfast, we need not be ashamed of our history. With a little planning and political will, we can turn our dark past into a tourism bonanza, creating hundreds of thousands of jobs in the process. The building blocks are there: South Africa has a well-documented and fascinating history of the struggle against colonialism and apartheid. Think of Freedom Park in Pretoria, Apartheid Museum in Gold Reef City, the Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory in Houghton, Liliesleaf Farm in Rivonia, Hector Pietersen Memorial and Museum in Orlando West, Soweto, the Gallows Museum at the Kgosi Mampuru Prison in Pretoria, Robben Island, Nelson Mandela’s Capture Site in Howick, KwaZulu-Natal and much more. Why not bring all these facilities under one village in order to give tourists a seamless and interconnected experience of South Africa’s liberation struggle? If these were under one site, they would have the potential to easily attract in excess of a million visitors every year. It would require significant number of billions to move all these into one large village. The politics of such a move and its implications would also require to be handled with great care. If I was a potential tourist sitting somewhere in Tokyo, I would seriously consider visiting a village where I would spend half a day saturating and soaking myself into South Africa’s liberation struggle history. Walking from Liliesleaf Farm, to the Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory, the Gallows Museum and the Freedom Park, all in one village, complete with 3D presentations, voiceover narration, real-life videos, exhibitions, sculptures and illustrations, will offer an experience like no other. Since the village will be an emotionally charged and tear-inducing affair, tours could be broken down into different sessions, with breathing breaks in between. Tourists would use the breaks to smoke, use the loo and explore curio shops and restaurants selling local food. For obvious reasons, it would not be possible to move and relocate a heritage site like Robben Island to another area. And it is not desirable to do so. After all, not everything has to be moved. The facilities that cannot be relocated could be recreated at the village, using 3D and other modern technology. But I can’t come up with a logical reason why the Apartheid Museum, Freedom Park, Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory, Liliesleaf Farm and the Gallows Museum should not be relocated in one place. Locating them under one site makes perfect sense and it would help a great deal to demonstrate how one piece of history is connected to the next. What better way to turn a gloomy and sad history into a story that could potentially attract over a million tourists into South Africa. This would also go a long way towards addressing youth unemployment, which is north on 60%.   