The ANC in Gauteng is exuding renewed confidence in the run-up to Wednesday’s elections after its own internal polls, released this week, suggested the party would retain the province with a convincing 56%. But the DA told City Press that its own polls showed the ANC polling less than 50% in the province. Lebogang Maile, the ANC’s provincial head of elections, told City Press that the party was not even contemplating any talks of coalitions as it was assured of victory. Yet, in all this euphoria, he knew that with the assured victory – according to the poll – the research highlighted numerous areas of concern for the party. Read: Zuma boost to divided ANC Just more than half (56%) of those older than 60 sampled during the course of conducting the internal poll – with a sample of 1 826 voters and with a margin of error of 2.3% – said the ANC they had been subjected to “was no longer the ANC they once knew”. Almost two-thirds of those polled (67%) said they had been deeply “disappointed by the ANC”. Just more than half (59%) said the ANC was failing to deal decisively with corruption and 31% said the ruling party was out of touch with the realities of millions of South Africans on the ground. Maile conceded that these were genuine concerns being raised by communities and that more still needed to be done by the ruling party. He used Emfuleni as a case in point. “Emfuleni, in Sedibeng, is a good example. There were problems in that municipality, mostly historical, but they had evolved over a period of time. You will remember that early last year we took a decision as the provincial government to intervene and we sent a team to beef up the municipality. Since that intervention there has been some drastic change. “We know that the problems were systemic, among others things the inability to raise revenue, which has improved since the intervention. “Another problem was the issue of the failure to provide service delivery, fixing sewage spillages, and the collection of waste matter that we have already done. “Fortunately, as MEC for environment in the province and in that capacity, I have sent a team there whose work has been comprehensive and substantive and we are beginning to see results,” said Maile. DA Gauteng premier candidate Solly Msimanga dispelled Maile’s claims that Emfuleni was on the right track since the intervention. Last month he led a protest calling for action over concerns of poor service delivery and a lack of accountability and transparency within the municipality. Maile, however, remained bullish, suggesting that the party has a turnaround strategy and the recent polls highlighted that they were on the right track. He said that, unlike the national list, the provincial list had taken tough decisions on individuals with allegations of corruption hanging over their heads, such as former health MEC Qedani Mahlangu and former ANC chief whip in the Gauteng legislature Brian Hlongwa. An academic involved with the survey revealed that the upturn in prospects were thanks to “the emergence of President Cyril Ramaphosa as the party’s leader after the ANC’s 54th elective conference which has drastically resurrected the party’s fortunes in the run-up to the sixth democratic elections”. “Ramaphosa being at the helm has surely brought a double figure digit, about 10% to 12% of the votes, back to the ruling party. “There is no arguing that, with all the party’s dirty laundry being aired before the various commissions, the party ought to have slumped in terms of numbers. “However, many South Africans see the party under Ramaphosa as being on a route to transformation and decisively dealing with corruption.” He said that Ramaphosa polling higher than the party was unprecedented and only the second time in the country’s history. The first time was for former president Nelson Mandela. “Jacob Zuma and Thabo Mbeki were always lifted by the party’s popularity but in this case Ramaphosa is lifting the party’s standing, particularly in Gauteng.” Maile said he believed from the interactions that he has been having on the campaign trail that the biggest vote for the ANC in the province would come from the three metros, Johannesburg, Tshwane and Ekurhuleni. TALK TO US If the ANC were to win back control of Gauteng, do you think anything would change? What would you like to see change? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword GAUTENG and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material     