On the occasion of his party’s final rally leading up to Wednesday’s elections, EFF leader Julius Malema took the opportunity to pay a moving tribute on Sunday to his grandmother who passed away just a day before this momentous occasion. “My grandmother meant everything to me. I am who I am today because of her contributions, she was with me through all the difficult times and every time I say we come from poor family’s I genuinely mean it. But even though we were faced with hardships, she still made sure that she put food on the table for our family. She provided leadership because she knew that she had no option, Mosadi o tshwara thipa ka bohaleng [a Setswana idiom roughly translated as A woman holds the knife on the sharp side of the blade], meaning she ensured that even through the hardship we prevailed,” said Malema. The EFF leader added that his grandmother, Sarah Malema, would have wanted him to be at Orlando Stadium - just a few kilometers from the party’s birthplace, Uncle Tom’s Hall - in Soweto to address the party’s faithful. “She would have wanted me to be here and even as she has left, she knows that she has left me in the good hands of the EFF’s ground forces. I am not an orphan because today I am a father to so many children,” said Malema. He added that his family was appreciative of all the messages of condolences from ordinary citizens and other parties alike: “They [the condolence messages] are the ones keeping us going, we thank you for the support,” said the EFF leader. He was addressing thousands of supporters who filled up the 40 000-seater Orlando Stadium. Malema said his grandmother was his confidante who stood by him as every conceivable allegation was levelled against him, including his court appearances. EFF national chairperson, Advocate Dali Mpofu, was charged with welcoming the thousands of supporters on the day and also took the opportunity to pass his condolences to the Malema family. “You know that this is a better sweet event, we are celebrating because we know that things will change after Wednesday’s vote but we have also lost a mother in the passing of ugogo uSarah yesterday.” “Our condolences go out to our CIC and his family. After we heard the news we spent hours with the CIC but he urged us to come to the stadium last night and do the final inspections. This is the type of fighter that ugogo uSarah has raised.” EFF student command president, Peter Keetse, also paid tribute saying he was “humbled by the courage and character” demonstrated by Malema. “Our CIC being here shows his commitment towards fighting for the cause of black people. We recognise and appreciate your commitment CIC. Our condolences go out to you and your family,” said Keetse. Malema said that the day was meant to appreciate “the good work done by the party’s foot soldiers” and “to consolidate the great campaign leading up to Wednesday’s elections”, it was not about his grandmother. “My grandmother will be buried on Saturday” he announced, adding that “this is when we will get an opportunity to talk more about her”.