The South African information and communication technology (ICT) sector has not transformed in the way that our democracy so richly promised. The ICT sector is not alone in resisting change and deep transformation. Different sector charters point to the concerning ways various captains of industry have been united in implementing only incremental transformation while investing in the survival of the old ways of doing business that favour white – mostly male – players. You only need to look through the remuneration figures of publicly listed companies to see how white men still earn the lion’s share of executive pay in the sector. You only need to page through old ICT publications or visit internet publications from a decade ago to see how many previously disadvantaged players have disappeared. This is an indictment on the industry as it reinforces the sense that those who hire service providers prefer to stick with the old boy’s network. Policymakers who imagined that guidelines for transformation would be enough to inspire diversity have underestimated the resilience of these old networks. The Competition Commission has shown the extent to which established players collude to lock out new players from many sectors, including construction and consumer goods. It is disheartening to complete requests for proposals and go through numerous presentations only to be disqualified because your company does not conform to the white-owned and managed stereotypes. The private sector is often presented as a successful bearer of the blueprint for South Africa’s path towards a sustainable future. Sadly, our experience has been that the private sector has lagged on transformation. It cannot be that the private sector believes it must be left to government and public sector organisations to drive transformation in ICT. It is disappointing that the industry still relies so heavily on a “transformation” model that typically involves the installation of black CEOs in white-owned companies, or the old strategy of selling 25% of lily-white companies to BEE players.  If you look at who is graduating and with what degrees, it’s clear the ICT sector is missing out on hiring or doing business with the unstoppable wave of young black women who are graduating every year. These millennials are digital natives who have the skills, hunger and world view that would make them invaluable assets in any organisation, either as employees or technology service providers. Those who do get a foot in the door do not last very long because the sector is notorious for making it difficult to survive if you’re not white. Without a tangible and measurable commitment to transformation, the sector will not become an employer of choice for many of these bright young minds. A focus on women is imperative because of our country’s notorious male bias. Young women, particularly young black professionals, need all the support they can get because the glass ceiling has yet to be shattered in any significant way. One of the most urgent needs for our sector is measurement of transformation targets. Without measurable achievement of meaningful targets, many of the established players will continue to pay lip service to transformation. In this regard, we need to establish measurement models that do not rely on subjective opinions of evaluators and adjudicators. For example, we can apply models such as the UK’s G-Cloud framework, which provides a level playing field to all suppliers, with levels of transparency covering an all-encompassing scope from pricing to services, including actionable performance indicators to enforce quality of delivery. This approach is helping the UK transform its public sector ICT industry, with almost 40% of procurement being targeted at local small and medium-sized enterprises supported by multinationals that play an empowering role. South Africa’s private sector can learn and benefit from these types of innovative and inclusive procurement models. Technology is advancing rapidly, and it is imperative for South Africa’s decision makers to embrace the new generation of tech players. The future belongs to those who recognise that young Africans, particularly women, will drive the next set of innovations in this sector – a sector that is too important to be left only to white men.