Controversial dancer and entertainer Zodwa Wabantu says she is marrying the love of her life because he has accepted her for who she is. Unlike the many people who have labelled the underwear-free gqom dancer a “prostitute” or “slut” because of her sultry dance moves, her bae was accepting of her from the start, says Wabantu. “This is the only man who stood by me. This is the only man who never judged me. Instead, he has taught me the meaning of love.” Wabantu (34), whose real surname is Libram, admitted that when she met fiancé Ntobeko Linda (23) five years ago, she was a lost soul. “I was sleeping around; my life had no direction. But today I am happy to say he is the only man who has brought happiness into my life,” she told City Press this week. Now everyone is going to get a dose of their love on her reality show, scheduled to air on the Moja Love channel (DStv 157) from May 25. The show will also feature Libram spending time with her six-year-old son and getting cosy with her Ben 10. Her fans will witness her undergoing cosmetic surgery, but she is keeping mum on those details for now. On Thursday, Libram threw an engagement party for Linda and a few close friends at Durban’s Barrio restaurant, which she said was her way of showing her appreciation and declaring her undying love for him.  She is planning a big wedding for as early as next month. Although the couple have yet to decide on a date, Libram insists that it is going to be a simple yet classy event. Asked whether she would be changing her surname, Libram joked: “No, Linda can keep his surname and use mine.” As far as finalising the guest list and budget for her big day, Libram said she still had to work out the details but was expecting at least 150 guests. She has a wedding gown in mind, something simple and elegant. She is still looking for a wedding planner but says her friend Gugu Khathi, the wife of her boss, record label owner and kwaito artist DJ Tira, will handle the arrangements.  Before this week’s engagement celebration, Libram took Linda by surprise by proposing to him at popular Durban shisa nyama, Eyadini Lounge, last week. The Soweto-born Libram knelt in front of him and asked him to marry her. Without a moment’s hesitation, the shy Linda immediately said “yes” in front of hundreds of patrons. The mother-of-one is not embarrassed to say she would marry herself. She wrote as much on social media while posting photos of the engagement rings that she bought for herself, as well as Linda, from Jewel Africa in Johannesburg. Her custom-made, princess-style, nine-carat rose-gold morganite ring is worth over R50 000, while her bae’s ring cost less than R20 000. “I bought what I could afford; I always do things according to my affordability,” she says.  Libram says it may bother others to see Linda date an older woman, but she has a thick skin. “I am his blesser; we love each other and his mother has accepted me. So, we don’t care what the next person thinks of our relationship,” she said, adding that Linda was not in it for money, but for love. “It is genuinely love. Ntobeko is very shy and what I like about him is that he doesn’t like fame. He understands that it’s just a job,” she said.  The newly engaged couple have been in a relationship for almost five years. They met at a nightclub when Libram was still a debt collector and Linda was working at as a consultant at a bank. It was Linda who came to join Libram and her friends at the table where they were sitting. “He joined us, our eyes locked, and from that day I knew it was love at first sight, although he never said anything,” she said. “We became friends and started spending time together. It was only a few months later that we started dating. Again, it was me who made the first move. I kissed him and, as they say, the rest is history.”   