Nqaba Bhanga is so confident he will be the next premier of the Eastern Cape that he says he will have to write an urgent letter to current Premier Phumulo Masualle, because once he is premier next week he won’t have time to write to him. He intends to ask the premier about a new building in King William’s Town which is being used by various provincial departments, including the economic development department, but which has now been condemned because of poor workmanship in the construction of the building. Bhanga is the DA leader in the province and is also the premier candidate ahead of Wednesday’s general elections. On Worker’s Day, Bhanga, accompanied by a few party supporters clad in blue T-shirts, led a march in protest against the waste of taxpayers’ money. Read: Workers’ Day means nothing to many people – a consequence of SA’s laws He said the #Sidikiwe march was to show how fed up people were with the government, which “does not care about the masses”. Bhanga sat at the back of a black bakkie waiting to address the small crowd. As soon as he was introduced by the programme director, he threw his right hand fist into the air, shouting “Amandla!”, the popular slogan across all political parties, to which the crowd responded: “Ngawethu. Ngena Mmusi ngena, Viva DA Viva.” He thanked the party’s marshals and those who were responsible for planning the march. “I can tell you that this is the best march I have ever been to,” he said. Not far from where Bhanga was addressing DA supporters, Cosatu was having a May Day rally at the Victoria Grounds. This had resulted in King William’s Town being painted red – from Cosatu members who mostly wore their colours or ANC regalia – and blue from DA supporters who decided to join the march through the streets of King William’s Town. It did not escape the provincial DA leader that an alliance of the ruling ANC was also commemorating Worker’s Day not far from where he was standing. “All those at the stadium [Cosatu at Victoria Grounds] don’t matter. “The people who matter are the people on the roads, the people who are marching. “And our message I can tell you is going to each and every home of the people who have seen us today, because that is what it is all about.” Bhanga said the DA had chosen to march outside the government building to expose how the state was “misusing taxpayers’ money, which could have been used to create jobs”. “This building has been condemned. This building is falling apart. It looks so beautiful but I can tell you this building is so dangerous the workers who work here today, who operate from here, are in danger. “The department of social development has already left this building.” Bhanga said he would advise the premier to tell workers to leave the condemned building “without any further delay”. But while Bhanga was addressing the DA supporters a man driving past in a white bakkie raised his fist and shouted “Viva ANC”, irking the DA provincial leader. “Listen to that stupid Viva ANC, while we are talking about a building that is collapsing because of the ANC,” he said. On his future plans for the province Bhanga said the party planned to replicate what the DA government was doing in the Western Cape. “Everybody wants to go to the Western Cape because there the infrastructure is well maintained. Its roads are well built, investors are attracted to go there, jobs are accessible in the Western Cape. “There is no corruption in that province and the economy grows. This is what we want to replicate in the Eastern Cape,” he said.    