A meeting of the family of the late Oliver Mtukudzi scheduled for May 21 to finalise his estate is expected to stoke further divisions in the family as his daughters are said to be holding consultations to push for the invalidation of his last will and testament. This is because the late music icon left nothing for his daughters after bequeathing everything to his surviving wife, Daisy. His three daughters, Sandra, Selmour and Selby, are from an earlier marriage. Mtukudzi was a trailblazing Afro-jazz musician who was loved both at home and abroad, notching up immense respect that earned him ambassadorships with UN agencies. By the time of his death earlier this year, at the age of 66, he had released more than 65 albums. He is also nominated for an SA Music Award for his album Hany’ga, which was released last year. Read: Tuku built bridges with music But beyond the musical glory, Mtukudzi left behind family members at war with each other. As if the bitter family feud that characterised his funeral four months ago – which saw his wife and daughters disagreeing over where he should be buried – were not enough, the release of his estate this week has deepened family divisions. “I hereby bequeath all my properties, share and shares in any company or companies or entities to my wife, Daisy Kudzai Mtukudzi,” reads part of the one-page will deposited with the master of the high court. Mtukudzi’s will has divided opinions inside Zimbabwe and, according to close family associates, lawyers and other sources, has set the stage for further feuds within the family. Questions have also been raised over possible manipulation of the will, although legal experts have dismissed the allegations. The law firm that recorded Mtukudzi’s will has been placed under the curatorship of Thoughts Deme Attorneys at Law. Mtukudzi’s daughters and other close relatives are said, claimed sources and some lawyers, to be planning to have the registrar of high the court invalidate the will. Sources say the Mtukudzi daughters will push for an independent liquidator if the courts assent to their push for the will to be invalidated. “The only way that a will can be cancelled is if the courts invalidate it and there have to be serious reasons for the courts to arrive at that decision,” said an attorney yesterday, who declined to be named. “It’s impossible to tell right now if the Mtukudzi will was manipulated, but if anyone wants to challenge it they have to go through court processes, starting with the May 21 meeting that has been called for by the registrar of the high court.” Close family members said two of Mtukudzi’s daughters who are consulting on challenging the will have premised their challenge on alleged tampering with the will. However, some legal experts said it was difficult to tamper with a will as it would have been registered with the courts when it was first drafted. “To allege tampering means everyone would have been involved, including the court. A will is drafted and registered with the courts and it is kept in custody by a lawyer, a law firm or your church pastor who then presents it to the family when you pass away. It bears a will number of the registrar of the high court. Tampering is very difficult,” said the legal expert who spoke to City Press yesterday. Another lawyer who said he had been consulted by some of Mtukudzi’s daughters said: “His daughters are consulting on the way forward and they are readying for a legal fight over the estate of their father. They have the backing of all their other relatives and believe there is a case to pursue.” The estate that has been recorded under the will includes deeds for residential and commercial properties, vehicles and funds in a local bank account, as well as Tuku Music Promotions Private Limited. Close associates of the late music icon say he may have had other properties in South Africa. Future funds from royalties that are likely to continue streaming in will also probably be the centre of feuds between family members. The Law Society of Zimbabwe (LSZ) has confirmed to City Press the legitimacy of Thoughts Deme Attorneys at Law. “Thoughts Deme is a registered law firm, I can confirm that,” Edward Mapara, executive secretary for LSZ, told City Press yesterday. The “edict” May 21 meeting aims to finalise the late muso’s estate. Apart from the feuds over Mtukudzi’s estate, the family has also been at each other’s throats over who will take over and continue with his musical legacy. Mtukudzi had already started grooming Samantha, his daughter with Daisy, to take over leadership of his music empire. However, Selmour, who already has a musical career, has taken over. She has been holding shows around the country under the theme Tuku Music Lives On. The shows have been well attended and she has received an endorsement as well as a courtesy top-of-the-range vehicle from a local car rental company. Some members of the original Black Spirits band, which played with Mtukudzi around the world, have been joining Selmour for her shows. Daisy seems unfazed by all that is happening around her and has hinted that the divisions and feuds rocking the family after her husband’s death always characterised his life. “I want Oliver to rest in peace. Whatever is happening now was always happening when he was still alive, so nothing is going to change,” she said at Mtukudzi’s memorial service last month. “I have learnt that I have to remain silent. I will not speak out, just as Tuku was always a reserved man. After his burial, people tried to talk a lot.” She seems to have few sympathisers within and outside the family though. But just like Mtukudzi fought for the rights of widows in the classic Neria song, the title track to a film of the same name, which carved a grand mark in his career, it remains to be seen how the looming disputes over his estate will be resolved. Statistics gathered by Human Rights Watch – an international non-governmental organisation that conducts research and advocacy on human rights – for its 2017 report titled Violations of Property and Inheritance Rights of Widows in Zimbabwe found that: “Zimbabwe is home to around 587 000 widows”, most of whom are suffering property violations by relatives. But Daisy’s story is different in that she is fighting against the children of her late husband. The upcoming family meeting is likely to be epic and dramatic, just as Tuku’s family has been so far in his afterlife.