North West premier Job Mokgoro has changed more than half of the provincial departments he inherited from his predecessor, Supra Mahumapelo, with the sixth administration seemingly placing a sharper focus on education and finance. The functions of the two departments have been separated from the previous finance, economy and enterprise development department, and the education and sports development department, respectively. Mokgoro entrusted Motlalepule Rosho as the new captain of the finance department and Wendy Matsemela leads the education department. Rosho, who had been among the ANC premier candidates in the province, was previously heading local government and human settlements, while Matsemela was previously at finance. Mahumapelo cleaned out Mokgoro also replaced three of Mahumapelo’s trusted lieutenants, namely Ontlametse Mochware (Department of Culture, Arts and Traditional Affairs), Fenny Gaolaolwe (Department of Social Development) and Wendy Nelson (Department of Tourism). But at least one ally of Mahumapelo, Tsotso Tlhapi, came in as the new arts, culture and sports MEC — becoming one of the two new names in the provincial executive including Kenetswe Mosenogi, who took over the new economic development, environment and tourism department. Arts, culture and tourism had been the core pillars of economic growth in North West under Mahumapelo, receiving a significant share of the provincial budget. Six new departments Finance and education are among the six departments that changed names, with the economic and enterprise development functions shifted to the economic development, environment and tourism department. Environment moved from the previous rural, environment and agricultural development department, which became agriculture and rural development. Education was previously paired with sports development, and the latter has now become a function of the new arts, culture, sports and recreation department. Local government and human settlements has changed to cooperative governance, human settlements and traditional affairs. The traditional affairs function previously belonged to arts and culture. Regional representation The new provincial executive also featured a strong representation of ANC leaders from Dr Kenneth Kaunda region in the Potchefstroom/Klerksdorp area, as well as Bojanala region in Rustenburg. The two regions account for 80% of Mokgoro’s executive, represented by four MECs each. Rosho, Mosenogi as well as public works and roads MEC Saliva Molapisi and health MEC Madoda Sambatha hail from Dr Kenneth Kaunda. Tlhapi, Matsemela as well as agriculture and rural development MEC Desbo Mohono and community safety and transport management MEC Sello Lehari are from Bojanala. The Dr Ruth Segomotso Mompati region in Vryburg is represented by Gordon Kegakilwe (cooperative governance, human settlements and traditional affairs) and Boitumelo Moiloa (social development). The provincial capital in Mafikeng under Ngaka Modiri Molema region had no position in the executive except for Mokgoro, whose residence is in Mafikeng.