EFF leader Julius Malema says he will be part and parcel of the black elites living in Sandton who the people of Alexandra will turn against should the inequality between the two places continue. Malema was addressing the EFF May Day rally in Alexandra which was attended by thousands of party supporters at the Alexandra Stadium on Wednesday. The rally comes four days before the EFF will look to give a final show of force at Orlando Stadium in Soweto on Sunday, when the party will host it’s Tshela Thupa rally ahead of next week’s general elections. “How do white people sleep in Sandton when they see their neighbours like this? What type of love do you practice because if it is love of the bible then the bible says love your neighbour. What have you done for your neighbour here in Alexandra. We keep on blaming government and government, yes let us do that but our neighbours, what are they doing to change the lives of their neighbours? Do they put money and say this money will be spent in Alexandra, they are not doing anything. They are staying in high walls, you know why? They are scared of us and they have got reason to be scared of us because they know that they are eating alone. When you know that you are eating alone, your subconsciousness tells you that there is something wrong that you are doing, ‘let me build the high wall before these people come,’" Malema said to loud cheers. “Let us warn you, Sandton with high walls or not, the day will come where Alexandra says enough is enough, let us go and share food with the people of Sandton, with the people who stay in the suburbs. And that day when you take that decision, even me I won’t be safe because you are going to find me there in Sandton. That is the day I am going to know you better, when I try to open my mouth, you will say to me and all the black elite, ‘keep quiet you sold us out, you came to stay with them here you forgot about us. Who are you to call us to order that day is coming.’ However that day can be avoided let us start now to share that which we have with the people of Alexandra, if you don’t want them in Sandton give them that which you have in Sandton.” Malema urged the crowd to come out in their numbers to vote for the EFF which will be participating in its second general election. He repeated the aspirations of the EFF which include 24 hour clinics, fee free schools, RDP houses with two or more bedrooms, flushing toilets and clean townships. Malema also announced that the EFF will have a pre- condition for entering into talks for coalitions should the need arise in Gauteng. He says he will demand that all townships governed by the political party wanting to enter into talks with it first be cleaned properly before negotiations can commence. The party leader lamented the sad state of affairs in townships saying they were a breeding ground for all sorts of diseases, reducing the quality of life of residents.   