It was the area that became known for its service delivery protests around the time of the 2016 local government elections. Vuwani was on fire. Nearly 30 schools were razed to the ground during protests as residents demanded that the Municipal Demarcation Board reincorporate them into the Makhado Local Municipality. And now? Not much has changed, they say. People are still unemployed. There is no running water, and homes still don’t have electricity. During South Africa’s elections on Wednesday, a group of young men could be seen hanging around Ratshikwekwete Secondary School, one of the voting stations situated in Tshitungulwane village. Clement Mukoma (25), from Tshitungulwane, said that all political parties were the same and that he did not see any reason for voting. Being a born-free, Mukoma said in 2014 – the year he was eligible to vote for the first time – he could not care less about casting his vote. That has still not changed. “I see voting as a waste of time. Despite water and sanitation not being provided, there is not even a single park for the kids to play at,” he said. One of his friends, a 21-year-old who wished to remain anonymous and was currently doing grade 12, echoed Mukoma’s sentiments. “Our roads are in a bad state and currently, water and sanitation remain a huge challenge in our lives,” he told Mukurukuru Media. “Maybe things will change after the election, and perhaps I might consider voting in the near future,” he concluded. Read: Hopeful young people vote to be heard in Alex, the disillusioned stay home Despite threats of a shutdown in the area, the community of Vuwani turned out peacefully to cast their votes on election day. Election officials were on high alert, following unrest in the area earlier this week, when the community went on a total shutdown. Police were on standby to mitigate any violence that might have erupted. Although the majority of the youth had decided not to vote, Fhatuwani Tshithavhane (31) from Tshitungulwane village said he was voting because he believed that would bring change in his community. The electrical engineer was on his way to cast his vote at Ratshikwekwete Secondary School. “I feel it is important that I vote because in that way I get to have a voice in terms of who gets to govern the country, including my own community,” he said.– Mukurukuru Media