Hospital needs government green light to make modifications to vital cardiac catheterisation laboratory Chris James* was diagnosed with ischaemic heart disease in December last year. Its symptoms include chest pains, short breath and could lead to a heart attack. James (40) has been put on medication for this condition, but feels he is going to die soon if a procedure to treat him is not performed. He claimed he had been promised help by Lwandile Sicwetsha, spokesperson for the Eastern Cape health department, but nothing had happened. “I have not been helped. Are they going to wait until there is permanent damage to my heart or until I am dead? That guy made me a promise and I want results. Every day I can feel I’m getting weaker,” he said. James is one of the 174 patients suffering from different heart ailments who are waiting for procedures to be performed but who will have to wait longer because a multimillion-rand specialised machine commissioned to do the work is not operational yet. The backlog has been caused by modifications needed to a cardiac catheterisation laboratory (cath lab) at Livingstone Hospital in Port Elizabeth. The cath lab was commissioned and installed by provincial authorities on March 25 at an estimated cost of R25 million after the old machine broke down in October last year.  Livingstone and the Nelson Mandela Academic Central Hospital in Mthatha are the only places in the Eastern Cape that are equipped with cath labs. The modifications that need to be carried out are in the room where the cath lab machine is kept. They include creating a sunken area in the room, reinforcing the concrete floor once, and upgrades to air conditioners and humidifiers, according to Dr Rolene Wagner, Eastern Cape deputy director-general for hospitals and clinical support management services. “This high-end, latest technology has improvements compared with the last machine. But modifications need to be done to the room that houses the cath lab equipment,” she said. Wagner said the commissioning process for these modifications was under way. She said they were waiting for final approval from the provincial treasury. The anticipated date was the end of June. However, James alleged there were rumours that an opposition party community leader told him the reason the cath lab was not functioning was because there was no one to operate it. But Wagner refuted this, labelling the claims as “incorrect and without basis of fact”. “The Livingstone Hospital has a full cath lab and multidisciplinary clinical team available, who are experienced and competent, having – together – done hundreds of these procedures for more than a decade. Respectfully, [his] allegation is based on incorrect information provided to him reportedly by a layperson,” Wagner said. The allegation had implications, she said: “It would appear the person who advised him is not medically trained and therefore not knowledgeable on the technicalities of the cath lab service nor is he a part of the department management team actually involved in the process of restoring the cath lab service in the Port Elizabeth region and is thus not privy to the progress achieved.”  In the interim, Wagner said their cath lab team were doing angiograms on state patients at the Netcare – private – facility twice weekly. “These patients are being done in order of clinical priority,” she said. Wagner said there was a backlog of about 80 paediatric and 94 adult patients awaiting cardiac catheterisation. These patients, she said, are prioritised based on clinical urgency. “So this depends on the attending physicians’ judgement. Interventions, catheterisation in children are being done where it will aid in diagnosis and those with a date booked for cardiac corrective surgery. “For adults, patients are prioritised according to their clinical presentation and the severity of the condition of the patient,” Wagner said. She said because angiograms were a highly specialised intervention, it required appropriately qualified and trained medical specialists to use the cath lab to do the assessment and interventions. “These doctors are supported by equally trained and experienced medical technologists, perfusionists, radiographers and cardiac-trained nurses. “The equipment is very expensive. As a result of both the cost of the equipment, as well as the high level of expertise to conduct the procedures, one can only place this service in highly specialised units like one found in tertiary hospitals,” Wagner said. Wagner said she had spoken to James. This, she said, resulted in James being assessed by a physician on April 26. The assessment was done to ensure that the patient was clinically stable, that he was on the correct medication and to plan his review assessment. She said James was reassessed last Sunday and collected his medication on Tuesday but he still had to wait for the procedure to be done. Sicwetsha said clinicians selected patients who required emergency treatment and sent them to Netcare. “Those not in an emergency are given treatment and monitored by doctors as in the case of the complainant [James]. Netcare’s arrangement was made to make sure there is no loss of life while the new machine is not working.” *Not his real name What is your experience at government hospitals? SMS us on 35697 using the keyword HOSPITAL and tell us what you think. Please include your name and province. SMSes cost R1.50. By participating, you agree to receive occasional marketing material  