It was a privilege to witness a new era in South African media broadcasting - the arrival of Newzroom Afrika in the media scene this week. NewzRoom Afrika, which airs on DStv channel 405, is a 24-hour news channel which went live on air on Thursday 2 May, an opportune time as South Africans are casting their votes on in six days’ time in the general elections. Newzroom Afrika is a joint venture between Thokozani Nkosi, 43, of Eclipse TV and former SABC news anchor Thabile Ngwato, 28, from Rapid Innovation, which makes the venture 100% black owned and 50% women owned. It boasts a line-up of respected voices in broadcast media. A generational mix of talent, with former eNCA news anchors Cathy Mohlahlane and Thulasizwe Simelane and radio talk show veteran JJ Tabane among the heavyweights joining the channel’s Linden headquarters. In a sector that remains largely untransformed, media diversity has not been a notable feature in South Africa over the past 25 years of democracy. The year 2013 was perhaps a year that media diversity received a boost when a consortium led by the Sekunjalo investment Group purchased the Independent Group from its Irish owners. In the same year, Power 98.7, owned by the MSG Afrika Group, was launched after being granted a commercial talk radio station by the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa in December 2011. The two groups are led by businessmen Iqbal Surve and Given Mkhari, respectively. In 2008, e.tv, owned by economic empowerment investment company Hosken Consolidated Investments, which is owned and controlled by the Southern African Clothing and Textile Workers Union (Sactwu), launched SA’s first 24-hour news channel eNCA. Before all this happened, majority black shareholding in a media business could only be referenced to Zimbabwean businessman Trevor Ncube, who at the time and until recently owned Mail and Guardian in South Africa as well as other news titles in Zimbabwe. However, despite the diversity that these companies brought, it was sad to see media mogul Khanyi Dhlomo-Mkhize wind up her operations in December last year after Ndalo Media bulked under financial strain. In a country whose demographics are dominated by black women, it was sad to see Dhlomo-Mkhize leave this space. For women remain prejudiced not only in the media sector, but in all sectors. According to the book Media Landscape 2014: Celebrating 20 Years of South Africa’s Media, South African TV news also falls short of representing women in equal proportion to their numbers on executive boards or in parliament - 14 per cent on TV news as against 17 percent as executive board members and 42 per cent as parliamentarians. One might argue that SA’s leading titles have had their fair share of appointing black women of excellence in top editorial positions, with the Mail and Guardian ship currently being steered by a woman editor in Khadija Patel. Mapula Nkosi currently edits Sunday World and Nwabisa Makunga oversees editorial operations at The Herald in the Eastern Cape. Previously, Sunday Times and City Press were edited by women a few years ago. Also, EWN is currently being headed by SA National Editors’ Forum chairperson Mahlatse Mahlase, who is group editor-in-chief, a prominent voice of allowing a diversity of voices in the media landscape. But this hardly translates to them moving up the ranks to being in the business of the media. And this is why it is in the interest of all South Africans that this new entrant succeeds and stands the test of time. Ngwato recently told a talk show host in an interview that together with her business partner, they are working on a 20-year business plan, which hints at the fact that they are in it for the long haul. Ngwato and Nkosi both have a track record of entrepreneurial success and will hopefully deliver independent views of events unfolding in South Africa and around the world. Their young age will hopefully contribute to a diversity in their news coverage. Not long ago, Busani Ngcaweni, one of the most brilliant minds in the public sector whose hands are always itching to scribe views across various sectors of interest, opined a piece after former Sunday Independent and The Citizen editor wrote an open letter apologising to former President Jacob Zuma for always reporting negatively about him. In an extract to his piece, Ngcaweni wrote: “This effort will have to include the transformation of ownership and control structures of the mainstream media to free our scribes from the economic blackmail that threatens their livelihoods and makes them mere conformists with no original pro-African story to tell. “We call it blackmail because the political economy of the journalism profession is similar to others where black professionals can’t freely experiment and innovate without their livelihoods being threatened.” Ngwato said this week that she believes viewers are hungry for a different perspective that is fully independent and puts their interests first. She said that together with her colleagues, she made sure that the design of their editorial structure and the choosing of the members of the channel’s editorial board would entrench the highest levels of rigour and independence into their newsroom. With her words, one is hopeful that Newzroom Afrika will be a breath of fresh air independent of the “blackmail” that Ngcaweni referred to and also free from political influence. The 24 hour news channel should be an independent voice and with their youthful zest and approach towards digital elements, they will hopefully have their finger on the pulse of the nation. They should recognise that the consumption of news is constantly changing. The South African population comprises mostly of young adults, young voters and shape shifters. The story of NewzRoom Afrika should be a catalyst to creating more and more entrants and start-ups in South Africa to add to a plurality of voices in building on increased diversity in the media. The multiplicity of voices in the media is the very tenet on which our treasured democracy rests. A well informed electorate makes an informed decision best suited for the entrenchment of democratic values and principles. New entrants into the media landscape breathe in a new life, exuberance and dynamism that augur well for the viewer. Therefore, South Africa should welcome this new kid on the block with open arms and this must be viewed as a success story and a message is sent that there is space for start-ups in the sector. Moalusi is council member of the SA National Editors’ Forum and the organisation’s Gauteng Convener