ANC chief whip Pemmy Majodina says the newly minted caucus will not be lame ducks that shy away from holding the executive to account. Addressing the media for the first time since her historic appointment, Majodina appeared alongside ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule in Parliament today. A special sitting of the National Executive Committee (NEC) yesterday resolved to replace former chief whip Jackson Mthembu with Majodina, who was formerly an MEC in the Eastern Cape. Former National Assembly Speaker Baleka Mbete was replaced with Thandi Modise, and House chairperson Cedric Frolick was replaced with minister Nomvula Mokonyane. Lechesa Tsenoli will remain as Deputy Speaker, while Doris Dlakude keeps her position as deputy chief whip. Modise is replaced as chair of the National Council of Provinces (NCOP) by former Johannesburg mayor Amos Masondo. Majodina said that the new caucus would hit the ground running and begin the work of implementing the ANC’s manifesto. “I am whipping leaders and I am sure that those leaders will also take full responsibility of being leaders in their own right and do what the voters expect us to do in this National Assembly,” Majodina said. “We are going to ensure that as the ANC caucus we are not going to be lame ducks, we are going to ensure that we play our robust oversight on the executive without creating tensions but in line with the manifesto, because as ANC caucus we are going to unpack the manifesto in terms of an implementation plan. But we will also ensure that members of the ANC rise to the occasion and to the mandate that the ANC has given them.” The chief whip also hinted that President Cyril Ramaphosa would be announcing his much anticipated Cabinet on Monday, two days after his inauguration which is set to take place on Saturday. Majodina said the chairpersons of portfolio committees would be appointed thereafter. “As a matter of procedure in the ANC we await the president to appoint his Cabinet which will be done possibly by Monday. Thereafter as an organisation we will appoint capable chairpersons as well as the entire whippery.” Magashule brushed away a question around the work of the Integrity Commission and when the commission’s report would be tabled to the leadership of the party. City Press has reported that the report has at least 22 names of members who are unfit to hold public office. Read: ANC’s ethics body flags Mabuza and Gwede as ‘problematic’ The report was supposed to inform the parliamentary list which has since been finalised. Previously the ANC said the report would be considered immediately after elections. When asked about the status of that report on Tuesday, Magashule said the matter would be attended to, “Let’s leave it there.”    