The war of words and acrimonious accusations between the Johannesburg mayor and the Gauteng MEC for Cogta continue There is no letting up of the animosity between Johannesburg Mayor Herman Mashaba and Gauteng MEC for Human Settlements, Urban Planning and (Cogta) Lebogang Maile. The two are again butting heads over what Mashaba claims is Maile’s unwarranted flexing of his muscles on the Johannesburg administration. This follows Maile’s letter to the mayor demanding answers regarding an exposé by investigative journalism unit Amabhungane. The investigative news team reported that the EFF received kickbacks from Afrinet after the company was awarded the fleet management contract for the Johannesburg region, as well as R15 million after the City of Tshwane awarded a tender worth half a billion rand to Balimi Barui Trading (BBT) and two other bidders to supply the city with fuel for three years. This led to Maile – in his capacity as Cogta MEC – sending a letter to both Mashaba and his counterpart, Tshwane Mayor Stevens Mokgalapa, demanding to know whether the allegations had any truth to them. In a response seen by City Press, Mashaba lambasted Maile’s conduct, accusing him of attempting to gain political ground. “Your conduct smacks of politicking and raises the question as to whether you are genuinely concerned with the allegations at hand or rather seek, for nefarious reasons, to engage in an exercise of cheap political scoring,” wrote the mayor. Responding to allegations, that a tender awarded by his administration had unduly benefited the EFF, Mashaba hit back at his accusers, saying he would never sell his country short. “It’s really one of the insults that can never be levelled against me. “I can’t understand how anyone [could believe I would] give the EFF any tenders and in the process sell my country,” said an emotional Mashaba. He told City Press that municipalities had checks and balances in place to ensure that mayors could not influence tender-awarding processes. “I’m sure you know how municipal systems work. As a mayor, this matter of tenders is far away from me and there are many people involved, so it’s not really one committee that decides.” That being the case, added Mashaba, even if he had “an evil mind or an evil intent”, he would not be able to influence all these people, the majority of whom were ANC members, to award a tender to the EFF as a kickback. Maile and Mashaba have been at loggerheads for some time. In August, while outlining the state of all 11 Gauteng municipalities, Maile said he would not be blackmailed by “drama queen” Mashaba into placing the municipality under administration, despite having “enough” to do so. Mashaba countered that Maile was not exercising his oversight powers in good faith. “I find it alarming that you ran to the media regarding the allegations of tender irregularities surrounding the Afrinet contract prior to engaging with the city,” Mashaba said. When approached for comment on the matter, Maile told City Press that he could not add more, as all he had to say had been laid out in a letter he had addressed to Mashaba and Mokgalapa. However, Mokgalapa’s spokesperson, Omogolo Taunyane, told City Press that steps were being taken regarding issues of alleged corruption. “This was a claim made by Amabhungane and there’s no evidence that there were indeed any dodgy dealings regarding the tender,” she said. “We will await the outcome from the city manager’s office.” Mashaba accused the office of cooperative governance of being complicit in protecting “those found guilty of outward conduct”, referring to an investigation into Johannesburg ANC leader Geoff Makhubo, who allegedly received millions of rands from the City of Johannesburg by acting as an influence broker. Makhubo has denied the allegation. READ: Who’s to blame for violence? The state, who neglected us, say hostel dwellers Asked to comment, EFF provincial leader Mandisa Mashego said she was not the national spokesperson. Attempts to get hold of the EFF member who did hold that position – Mbuyiseni Ndlozi – were unsuccessful. While Mashaba questioned Maile’s motives for the allegations, Mokgalapa said that his department would look into the matter and comply with Maile’s request. The Tshwane mayor said that relevant actions would be taken should there be any illegality in the supply chain management and procurement principles. Maile had threatened to conduct a full-scale investigation, which could include approaching the Special Investigating Unit to look into tender irregularities in the Johannesburg and Pretoria metrosif they failed to give an adequate response to the corruption allegations. City Press 