Here are some of the headlines in your City Press Sports section today: Chiefs hit back at Pitso Chiefs hit back at Pitso Mosimane, accusing him of being too obsessed with Amakhosi. Bobby Motaung dismisses Mosimane’s jibe about Chiefs as resulting from his ‘obsession’ with them. But Pitso says: “I’m a big competitor because I want to win. As long as there is fair play.” Boks missing the influence of attack coach Swys de Bruin Injured Springbok number eight Warren Whiteley says the Boks may well be missing the influence of attack coach Swys de Bruin at the ongoing Rugby World Cup in Japan. The Etzebeth case So many questions, but we’ve all made up our minds already – Simnikiwe Xabanisa puts two and two together and comes up with five as he gives his take on the much-talked about Eben Etzebeth assault and racism case. Disaster in Doha as Team SA’s hopes fade If athletes come back empty handed from Qatar, it will be SA’s worst showing since the championship in Japan in 2007. Team SA’s underwhelming performances at the IAAF World Championships will certainly raise doubts about the country’s prospects at the Olympic Games next year Patrice Motsepe to buy Blue Bulls Mamelodi Sundowns president Patrice Motsepe wants a stake in the Blue Bulls and could soon acquire half of a controlling share in the rugby franchise after his company – African Rainbow Capital – put in a joint offer to purchase a controlling stake in the business. Should match officials reveal which clubs they support? With accusations flying back and forth regarding two AmaZulu goals that should not have been allowed, the Hanging Judge – Errol Sweeney – asks if the men in charge of matches should reveal their true identities. Nonina is ready for IBF title challenge Following her unanimous point decision victory over Flora Macheta last weekend, former SA and WBF bantamweight champion Bukiwe “Anaconda” Nonina cannot wait to dig her fangs into Maria Cecilia Roman for the IBF bantamweight title belt Soccer legends chart a new path Just when you thought they were dead and buried, some of local football’s masters and legends are on the verge of establishing a stokvel of a different kind – to promote a better and healthy lifestyle A break for reflection Although it’s said that it does not matter how teams start the race but rather how they finish, the first quarter of the season has given football followers a lot to talk about during the international break. . For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press today.