This year’s Telkom Knockout Cup draw has pitted MTN8 title holders SuperSport United against Telkom Knockout defending champions Baroka FC in what is expected to be a mouth-watering opening round of 16. Baroka FC were unlikely winners last year when they clinched the trophy on penalties to stun Orlando Pirates following a 2-2 regulation time draw in the final played at the Nelson Mandela Bay Stadium in December. They will be facing a resurgent SuperSport United who defeated Highlands Park on Saturday to claim the first trophy of the season. Speaking to City Press at the draw on Wednesday afternoon, Baroka’s coach Wedson Nyirenda – who was the only coach present at the event – said the road ahead would not be an easy one. “We will be facing a very good team under Kaitano [Tembo]. I think the team has rejuvenated into a very strong force. This can be attested by them winning the MTN8 tournament in a match that they played very well,” said the coach. “The game against them is not going to be an easy one. They are MTN champions and we are Telkom defending champions so it is sure to be an exciting game.” Having risen to prominence in 2011 by reaching the semi-finals of the 2011 Nedbank Cup and defeating several PSL sides, including Kaizer Chiefs, along the way, Baroka were underestimated last year and surprised many, Nyirenda said. Read: Nyirenda reveals Baroka tactics that TKO’d Pirates “We were not counted last year and Limpopo had never won a cup before. But in the end we came up as victors. We must realise that in cup games there are no small teams. No team should be counted out,” he said. “We have managed to put our structures in place as a team. I think supporters have also recognised our style of play. We are also one of the most disciplined teams when on the pitch. Unfortunately, we have not been getting goals despite creating opportunities.” The Limpopo-based team is currently 12th on the PSL table, something the team’s captain, Mduduzi Mdantsane, said should not be a hindrance to Baroka retaining the cup. “The trophy has to stay at home. We know how it feels to be in the final and win, so obviously we will go out there with that mentality,” he told City Press. “We are aware that the game against SuperSport will be a tough fixture but last year we also faced a big team [Orlando Pirates] so we know how to deal with such pressures. We have to respect SuperSport. They have started the season well and they are the MTN champions, but we are a team that believes in each other and we will do well.” SuperSport have won two MTN8 titles (2017 and 2019); two Nedbank Cups (2016 and 2017); and the Telkom Knockout in 2014, with just the league eluding them. With Matsatsantsa to host Baroka, SuperSport United defender Clayton Daniels said that this was an advantage for his team. “This is going to be a super clash. Two champions going up against each other. But for us it is a case of home ground advantage. It is important for us that we play them at home because we always do good against Baroka when we play them at home and when we travel there we struggle again,” he told City Press. “Our game has changed. Our play is now more direct – more attacking football as opposed to before when we used to mainly just defend. Gabuza [Thamsanqa] is working hard upfront so is Aubrey Modiba.” SuperSport are currently in 6th position on the PSL table after winning three of their seven games. Other exciting fixtures include matches between 2016/17 Telkom Knockout winners Cape Town City and Kaizer Chiefs as well as the Maritzburg United and Bidvest Wits clash. Dates and venues for the opening round of fixtures have not yet been announced.  Highlands Park v Black Leopards Cape Town City v Kaizer Chiefs Maritzburg United v Bidvest Wits Mamelodi Sundowns v AmaZulu SuperSport United v Baroka Orlando Pirates v Stellenbosch Golden Arrows v Polokwane City Chippa United v Bloemfontein Celtic    