Imphepho-filled air, a piano decorated in traditional Ndebele patterns and traditional South African music from the likes of Shwi Nomthekala, Soul Brothers and Caiphus Semenya were all just some of the elements that got fans warmed up and ready for Sjava’s one-man show in Times Square in Pretoria on Sunday night. With some fans having travelled from as far as KwaZulu-Natal to experience the historic moment, this was sure to be a night to remember – one night, one man. The much-anticipated show was ignited by a sombre moment when Ukhozi FM presenter Dudu “Lady D” Khoza got the show started. She introduced two women whom Sjava holds dear and close to his heart – his mother and a makoti, Sjava’s wife. Show goers and diehard fans alike were shocked by confirmation that Sjava does indeed have a wife, especially after his relationship with Lady Zamar and speculation surrounding Sjava and his relationship with fellow BET award winner Sho Madjozi. Sjava’s mother, Thandi Nkabinde, greeted fans and thanked them for supporting her son. She got into a traditional hymn, stirring up a blaze of emotions conveyed by fans as they sang along. Nkabinde introduced he daughter in law to the crowd and thanked her for being there for her son and the family. She then told the crowd: “I don’t want to hear anyone ask anything about who Sjava is dating.” Then the main act took centre stage as Sjava gave an intimate performance. He performed all his favourites and gave them more meaning. His performance was raw and honest, listening to the songs even I, a Tswana man from Pretoria, connected with every isiZulu word, and understood the meaning of it all. For a man known as Inkabi (a hitman), Sjava’s catalogue is made up of mostly love songs and his performance of these songs had people in their feels. Special guests included Sims Ngema, who gave an emotional performance tributed to her late husband Dumi Masilela. Bongani Radebe, popularly known as “Bongani Sax”,was also a highlight. His saxophone reignited the flame in many people’s relationships.   Journalist | City Press 