Forty of the 52 municipalities in South Africa are under administration, meaning paying salaries has become a month-to-month struggle. The government has placed a heavy reliance on administrators to solve most of the financial issues in these troubled municipalities. But this week the ANC revealed that it is slowly introducing a new district model which could sort out the problems. ANC secretary-general Ace Magashule announced on Wednesday that the national executive committee had decided to start the pilot phase of “khawuleza” – meaning hurry up – to speed up service delivery. The model, said Magashule, is meant to realign the three spheres of government, a mechanism which could be effective if supported by ANC councillors and local communities. There would be a single plan for each district, integrating various roles for government, communities and civil society so that they would work together to ensure the resuscitation of communities, he said. Parks Tau, deputy minister of cooperative governance and traditional affairs, told City Press that the model would look at the skills deficits in each municipality to address ongoing problems. The aim is to build the skills and capability through district hubs so that municipalities can implement the projects allocated to them. “We are not recreating a government; we are ensuring that we align our work at national and provincial level. We intend building on what we have,” Tau said. All the three spheres of government would work in unison, effectively coalescing operations and functions at the country’s 44 districts and eight metropolitan areas. The pilot will be launched in the OR Tambo, eThekwini and Waterberg districts where government is hoping to evaluate the successes and failures of the programme before integrating it into other areas. Tau said the government hoped to expand the programme by 2020. READ: Operation Resuscitate Municipalities: ANC tries new model of service delivery “A district model offers a ready platform to address the systemic challenges flagged annually, for example by the Auditor-General on municipal underperformance, and to recapacitate the 40 municipalities under administration,” he said. Political journalist | City Press 