The DA has instructed four of its leaders contesting for the position of federal council chairperson not to engage in a public debate which was scheduled for Wednesday at 9pm on eNCA. This decision was announced at a media briefing held at the DA’s Johannesburg headquarters on Wednesday by presiding officer of federal council elections, Desiree van der Walt. She said it was not the culture of the DA to “canvass the public” in order to gain support. “We don’t want people to go out and canvass voters and the public,” she said. Van der Walt said she had made the ruling that the campaign by the candidates should be focused internally among the 155 delegates who are expected to attend the crucial federal council meeting which starts on Saturday. She reiterated that these elections are strictly an internal election and that the media would be briefed on Sunday when the results have been finalised. Contesting for the post is former party leader Helen Zille, federal chairperson Athol Trollip, deputy chairperson of the federal council Thomas Walters, and deputy chief whip Mike Waters. The contestants have, however, already publicly voiced their interest in the position that is currently held by James Selfe and their thoughts on their opponents. “I wrote to each candidate requesting them to keep their campaigns private because we have a code of conduct,” she said. Van der Walt praised Selfe as a leader who has served the party with “dedication, humility and respect for all the federal leaders” for over two decades. eNCA had scheduled a debate on Wednesday for the four contestants but they were gagged by Van der Walt from participating. Van der Walt said that the federal leadership of the party should be in charge of upholding the image of the DA and leading the organisation. “We want people to run a campaign with the authorised delegates. We have seen all four of the candidates, except one (Walters) refusing to run his campaign through the media. This is unlike a congress where we elect a party leader,” van der Walt said. In a statement, eNCA editor Jeremy Maggs said the station found it disappointing coming from a party that places a premium on free speech and rigorous discourse and debate. eNCA had already advertised the event to its viewers throughout the week. City Press