This is what you can expect in your City Press newspaper today: Security minister at war with spy chiefs SA’s top intelligence chiefs are engaged in a high-stakes war with State Security Minister Ayanda Dlodlo, a stand-off President City Ramaphosa will most likely be drawn into to mediate. Mashaba: Leon sought tender from me In a development that could add fuel to conflict raging in the DA, Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba has made explosive claims that former party leader Tony Leon unsuccessfully tried to solicit business from the city. NPA to drop “rogue case” Three former executives of Sars will have to wait until next month to know if they will face a criminal trial for their role in the activities of the so-called rogue unit. Civil servants refuse to leave Finance minister Tito Mboweni’s plan to cut the country’s bloated civil service by encouraging officials to retire early appears to have failed miserably. Kelly’s out of Lebo’s biopic Kelly Khumalo, who was supposed to play Lebo Mathosa in the pop singer’s upcoming biopic, has apparently pulled out with R&B singer KB Motsilanyane roped in at the last minute to replace her. Let’s speak with one voice Artists and actors already put up with a lot – from being exploited to being oppressed – because their industry is unregulated, but it seems if one has a big mouth, there’s a good chance of getting blacklisted in the industry. VBS victims fear being killed Community members boycotted the parliamentary Portfolio committee meeting, allegedly fearful that speaking out against the looters in public could lead to them being killed. Etzebeth case divides the SAHRC Signs of cracks within the South African Human Rights Commission have become visible in the past few weeks, as the organisation handles the controversial hate speech case against the Springbok lock. IRR accused of picking on black DA leaders The institute is at loggerheads with some black leaders within the DA over its attempt to have a say in the politics of the opposition party through its #SaveTheOpposition campaign. She was forced to leave school Residents of a village describe depressing cases of extreme poverty, child-headed families and teenage pregnancy. Listing sexual misconduct by teachers Shocking statistics released in Parliament show that sexual abuse by teachers on pupils had risen by more than 230% since 2014. Irregularities in Ingonyama Trust’s financial statements Zulu King Goodwill Zwelithini’s Ingonyama Trust collected R118.4 million in rental income from inhabitants over the past financial year – an increase of 19% on the previous year. The new story of an African farm Programme gives the subsistence farmers access to 90 of South Africa’s most successful commercial farmers, who serve as their mentors. No tar road, no school More than 16 000 pupils in some parts of the Eastern Cape have not been able to attend school since the beginning of the term due to a protracted striker over a road. Residents say provincial government broke an election promise and vow to continue with protesting, which has shut down services in the area. Mental health Dangerous myths and sad facts: In this National Mental Health Awareness Month, experts speak about dangers of arbitrarily associating mental illness with violent crime. Celebrities in Jozi runway spectacular It has been a celebrity-filled runway spectacular at African Fashion International Joburg Fashion Week – from Khanyi Mbau to K Naomi, it was a meeting of Mzansi’s top celebrities. 