The recent spate of xenophobic violence in South Africa has not harmed relations between South Africa and Nigeria, according to International Relations and Cooperation Minister Naledi Pandor. She said this on Wednesday when she hosted Nigerian Foreign Affairs Minister Geoffrey Onyeama for bi-lateral talks, which she described as“positively spirited deliberations”. “We have expressed regret for these terrible events on several occasions, personally as well as through our president and his special envoys. I was most appreciative of your openness to discussing these challenges with me and the assurance you gave and acted on in support of our missions and South African businesses that faced retaliatory attacks,” Pandor said in her opening remarks. Read: Hundreds of foreign nationals forced to seek refuge at Katlehong police station Gauteng was hit by a spate of xenophobic violence last month with areas around Johannesburg and Pretoria being the most affected. The conflict also spread to Nigeria, where residents targeted South African businesses in retaliation. Read: 'Nigerians overreacted over xenophobia'- SA tells special envoy Pandor hosted the ministerial session of the Ninth Session of the Bi-National Commission between South Africa and Nigeria in Pretoria to discuss a number of agreements which could benefit both countries economically. Police Minister Bheki Cele and Gwede Mantashe, the Minister of Mineral Resources, were among the South African delegation. “South Africa is determined to continue to implement and development strategies directed at ensuring economic growth, socio-economic development and inclusive prosperity for the mutual benefit of all our people and the people of Nigeria. I hope the tasks we will agree to today will create a solid base for expanding economic cooperation and achieving increased levels of prosperity,” Pandor said. Onyeama said these were not merely just talks, but both governments were committed to ensuring that they are able fruitful discussions. “This is not just not one of the talk shops that will be full of promises and not full of implementation,” Onyeamar said. “We will be submitting this to the heads of state. We believe we have a framework and mandate for our two countries to really step up our bi-lateral relationship.” On Thursday, Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari will discuss the key points from the Bi-National Commission meeting with President Cyril Ramaphosa, and they will finalise key agreements. The first ever BNC Agreement was signed in 1999, which Pandor believes has been “purposeful in pursuing tangible outcomes aimed at ensuring real change”. In all 32 agreements and memoranda exist between Nigeria and South Africa.   Political journalist | City Press 