A senior official at a state-owned company was allegedly appointed without having a master’s degree – a requirement for the post. City Press has learnt that a complaint was lodged with the office of Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane last month against the Water Research Commission (WRC). It relates to the appointment of Khosi Jonas in July as executive manager for communications at the WRC. According to the complaint seen by City Press, the whistle-blower alleged that: “The appointment of Khosi was fundamentally flawed and irregular as she is not in possession of a master’s degree as what was stated on the advert.” . Did not make it known to the public that people who did not have a master’s degree could apply for the position; . Did not indicate that the WRC would consider people who were currently studying for a master’s degree; . Did not make it known that those without a master’s degree could submit proof of recognition of prior learning (RPL); . Did not explain how the RPL process worked; and . Cited a master’s qualification as requirement when it clearly was not necessary as the person appointed did not possess such a qualification. The whistle-blower alleged that Jonas did not meet the minimum requirements for the advertised position and should not have been shortlisted. “I therefore am compelled to report that her appointment was flawed and the recruitment process was designed to exclude candidates who would have been interested in the position and applied had all the above information been made available to the public. “The RPL policy was communicated to staff just before the appointment of Jonas was made, in an attempt to ‘legitimise’ Khosi’s appointment. To date we don’t know of anyone else that this policy has benefited except Jonas. “I would also like to formally lay a complaint against the WRC human resources unit for unethical conduct that was not policy compliant for implementing the RPL in the advert and only communicating the policy almost half a year after the fact. Jonas’s appointment has amounted to an illegal act which has pointed to irregular recruitment and labour processes,” the whistle-blower said. Oupa Segalwe, acting spokesperson for Mkhwebane, confirmed the complaint was received last month and nothing much has happened since then. He said the complaint was about the “alleged irregular appointment of a senior manager”. Jonas said she had nothing to do with her selection for the position. “As far as I am concerned a proper process was used in the appointment. Please feel free to engage the chief executive officer further on this matter should you have additional questions or require clarity,” Jones said. Dhesigen Naidoo, CEO of the WRC, said they had not received any communication from Mkhwebane’s office but they would cooperate fully. “As best as we know, with our knowledge of human resources law and practice, Ms Khosi’s appointment process has been completely lawful and within the public sector rules,” Naidoo said. He said the process followed was completely fair, within the stipulations of all South African laws, regulations and practices. “The accusations levelled are ill-informed and have no basis in fact.” Naidoo said the recognition of prior learning, as provided for in South African law, was clearly stated in the advert in January this year and that the advert specifically asked for the master’s degree. “The successful candidate, Ms Jonas has not completed such. This was also true for another of the four shortlisted candidates. Ms Jonas is currently in an advanced stage of her master’s degree with a timeline of completion of the next six months. She, a black African female, has been given a provisional appointment subject to the completion of the requirements as advertised. “Her permanent employment can only be enacted thereafter,” Naidoo said. The post, he said, was first advertised in October last year. “None of the applicants at that time met the criteria as stated in the advertisement. There were no applicants from the WRC. There was a relook at the post specifications and an updated, more accessible spec was approved,” he said. The second advert went out in January this year, and was repeated on social media platforms. Naidoo said it included the equivalence provision and the RPL matter was clearly stated. “The WRC board engaged the RPL issue and verified that it was provided for in legislation and practice. There were 69 applications in response to the January advertisement. Four candidates were shortlisted. The selection process followed. A provisional job offer was made in July this year and accepted later that month,” he said. The WRC, Naidoo said, ran a standard recruitment process of advertisement, shortlisting, interviews and competency testing. “The short list also included another candidate without a master’s degree. The panel concluded unanimously that she was the best candidate and all individual panel member reports are on file. “This was further satisfied by the competence and psychometric tests,” Naidoo said. “The panel concluded that there was no second place appointable candidate. That if Ms Jonas did not accept the appointment offer, a new recruitment process would have to be considered.”  Journalist | City Press 