Embattled former eThekwini Mayor Zandile Gumede may have her bail revoked after possibly violating her bail conditions. Gumede failed to inform the police that she had moved from her Umhlanga house that was supplied as her home address during her bail application. The Hawks only became aware of the fact that she had vacated the home on Thursday morning, when they carried out raids at the house and the homes of her co-accused who are implicated in a dubious R208-million Durban Solid Waste contract awarded in 2016. During the raid, the Hawks were informed that Gumede had terminated the lease and left the rented property. Read: Gumede axed as mayor after ANC KZN enforces sweeping changes Hawks national spokesperson Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi confirmed to City Press that upon arriving at the home, they were told by the owners that Gumede had left the property in July. “It is true that we raided the premises this morning and were informed that Gumede no longer resides at the premises. The matter is now being dealt with by the National Prosecuting Authority and the investigative officer, who will ascertain whether this does not amount to her violation of her bail conditions,” said Mulaudzi. The Hawks and the Asset Forfeiture Unit were seizing assets from Gumede and her co-accused in relation to the multimillion-rand fraud and corruption case. Mulaudzi said there were 10 houses that they were targeting on Thursday. City Press understands that more than R51 million in assets were seized, as well as a range of luxury vehicles including a Porsche, Jaguar and Lamborghini. Gumede last appeared in court with eThekwini senior councillor Mondli Mthembu and nine other co-accused in August and the matter was postponed to January 15. The controversial former eThekwini leader was then officially ousted as mayor in September following an announcement by ANC deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte confirming that Gumede and other senior party members had been removed from the powerful, decision-making executive committee. However, they remained ordinary councillors.    