The department of social services assisted 78 adult victims and 33 child victims of trafficking between January and September this year, and awareness around human trafficking is at an all-time high, according to Marina Reyneke, operations manager and founding director of the National Freedom Network. Reyneke says that human trafficking is the fastest growing crime in the world and poses lots of challenges due to its complex nature. “Trafficking in human beings is a worldwide phenomenon with increasing recognition that an urgent and effective response is required. Most time this complex nature deters, disempowers or even leaves freedom fighters despondent.” In light of the recent escalation in human trafficking cases both locally and around the world, the sixth international human trafficking conference will be taking place from November 13-15 in Johannesburg. Media Campaign Against Human Trafficking is a member of the National Freedom Network which works to reduce the incidences of trafficking in persons among vulnerable groups in South Africa, Nigeria and Europe and is hosting the conference. The conference, which has for the last five years taken place in Cape Town, will have delegates from over 40 organisations from over 15 countries participating. The conference poses a significant opportunity for collective thinking and networking to take place from various role players in order to address the needs of human trafficking. This year’s theme is: Unveiling the complexities of the human trafficking conundrum and exploring a multi-sectoral response. “We welcome all practitioners including non-governmental organisations, academia, faith-based organisations, mental health and medical sectors and governmental agencies both locally and internationally.” Some of the speakers at this year’s conference includes Professor Beatri Kruger from the Free State Centre for Human Rights, Dr Marcel van der Walt, Case Consultant at the National Freedom Network and from Unisa’s department of police practice, and Nomonde Mihlali Menji, advocacy manager at non-profit organisation Embrace Dignity. Van der Walt has called human trafficking a “statistical nightmare”. “Notwithstanding the lack of reliable numbers, the problem is prevalent in South Africa. The number of cases being reported suggests it is on the increase. The situation may in fact be far more chronic and severe than we know,” Marcel has said previously. Recent cases of human trafficking in South Africa include Mpumalanga police officials in Witbank who were allegedly involved in drug and human trafficking syndicates. News24 reported that six women came forward earlier this month with information about alleged police involvement, after they were lured to the province under the pretences of job opportunities but were held against their will, raped, fed drugs and forced into prostitution. READ: Cops involved in prostitution, drugs and human trafficking In September the Gauteng High Court in Pretoria found Nigerian national Ediozi Odi guilty of human trafficking and sentenced him to six life terms and an additional 129 years imprisonment. His involvement in recruiting, raping, and forcing girls as young as 13-years-old into taking drugs and prostitution shocked the nation. For more information on the conference visit MeCAHT.org 