“A significant part of the local economy is in the informal sector. Accordingly, we must support the sector by ensuring that micro financing facilities are readily available and accessible in localities,” former president Kgalema Motlanthe said at the opening of the Kgalema Motlanthe Foundation’s Dialogue Among Equals on Friday. The second instalment of the Drakensberg Inclusive Growth Forum, a three-day gathering of high profile thought leaders and stakeholders, kicked off at the Champagne Sports Resort in the Central Drakensberg, KwaZulu-Natal on Friday. Motlanthe said in the recent past, the political component at local government, which is made up of councillors and the council, was overreaching and getting involved in the administration of local government. “This has resulted in the blurring of the lines of accountability," he said. He called for the establishment of a local government independent of politics. “The state must outlast the term of [office of] politicians. It must not only be able to collect revenue but also have programmes that grow sustainable local economies,” he said. “An effective local state must not only provide basic needs and service but also develop mechanisms that generate income without placing an additional tax [burden] on the local citizens." Representatives from government, business, civil society, and the youth, came together to share ideas and develop action plans in response to the triple challenges of poverty, inequality and unemployment. The theme for this year’s forum is creative solutions: Strengthening local government and local economies. Bishop Malusi Mpumlawana, Justice Albie Sachs, Mcebisi Jonas, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan and EFF national spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi, are among the speakers. Addressing delegates Motlanthe said that the forum was a safe space among equals. “The forum is not meant to take binding decisions on any matter,” Motlanthe said. Read: SA needs to ditch the ‘business as usual’ approach – Motlanthe He said the forum was meant to draw valuable insights from those gathered to find solutions to some of the most pressing challenges facing the country. “At the centre of the solutions should be the absolute imperative to reduce poverty, unemployment and inequality,” Motlanthe said. He said this year’s forum was the focusing on local government because this level of government was at the cutting edge of service delivery. “Evidence has shown that it is at local government level where the most impact is made on citizens. Local government is where indeed the needs of our people are felt the most,” Motlanthe said. He added that focus was also on local economies. The forum will continue throughout the weekend.   Journalist | City Press 