After months of deliberations regarding the gender representation in the Gauteng provincial government, it was on Friday revealed that Kgosientso Ramokgopa would be replaced by Morakane Mosupyoe in the position of MEC of economic development, agriculture and environment. In a statement issued by the Gauteng government, Premier David Makhura thanked Ramokgopa for his contribution towards changing the state of the province’s economy in the last four months. “Ramokgopa has done a great job towards unlocking investment and economic opportunities in all five corridors of our province. I wish Dr Ramokgopa well in his new role, which will be announced soon,” said the premier. This comes as ANC deputy secretary-general Jessie Duarte confirmed during a press conference in July, that in a discussion about provincial leadership the national executive committee had decided the Gauteng government needed to have a 60/40 gender representation. After the elections, the national executive committee took a decision that all provincial governments should have more women members of the executive council than men, especially in provinces where a premier was male. At the time the province had five men and five women in these positions, with Makhura as premier. Makhura had been allowed to deviate from the formula after asking for permission from the top leadership. But this was reversed after the ANC Women’s League raised its unhappiness at the national executive committee meeting. Makhura was ordered to drop one male MEC and replace him with a female MEC. Mosupyoe takes over the reins after serving as a councillor in the City of Tshwane from 2006 to 2016. She also served as the member of the mayoral committee for health and social development and formed part of the social and economic cluster over the same period. Mosupyoe was the first female speaker of the City of Tshwane from 2011 until 2016. She is currently a member of the provincial executive committee and also serves on the provincial working committee of the ANC in Gauteng. “I am confident that she will build on the solid foundation laid by Dr Ramokgopa towards the realisation of our vision of growing the economy of our province. She will continue with the process of creating an integrated multi-tier special economic zone,” Makhura said.    Political journalist | City Press   