Here are some of the headlines in City Press Sports today: Rassie Erasmus’ successor? Don’t be surprised if he’s never been head coach. The one person that comes under the spotlight is defence coach Jacques Nienaber. A friend of the Bok coach from their army conscription days, the physiotherapist-cum-defence guru is Erasmus’ most trusted lieutenant, writes Simnikiwe Xabanisa. Safa makes a U-turn on international match officials Safa has made a U-turn and recommended two local referees as international match officials for next year’s Fifa panel after dropping them this year. Final prep on track for ‘Africa’s Major Ken Payet, the tournament director for the Nedbank Golf Challenge hosted by Gary Player, had just returned from a golf cart ride around the Gary Player Country Club when he again realised that what he refers to as the biggest sports event in South Africa was one day closer to teeing off. Go Boks Go The Springboks will be tested to the limit by adaptable Japan in today’s Rugby World Cup quarterfinal. Will Liverpool add to Ole woes? The Manchester United coach is under a lot of pressure to arrest the decline after a poor run that has left the Red Devils in 12th position, two points above relegation. What are referees’ responsibilities in racism row? If a player approaches a referee and complains that there has been racist abuse from the crowd, the referee should adopt a three-step protocol. What Molefi Ntseki’s fashion says about him Bafana coach Molefi Ntseki not only started his tenure with a win, but the 50-year-old also gave fans a glimpse of his fashion sense while on the touchline. Injury-prone or simply unlucky? As much as injuries are part of football, certain players just seem to be more injury-prone, while others are followed by bad luck: we take a look at these players. PSL back in full swing after the international break After recharging their batteries, the Absa Premiership campaigners are back in full swing next week – albeit just for three rounds of fixtures before yet another international break. What’s the point of having a policy that works against Team SA? The African Women’s Sevens Championships serves as a sad reminder of what Sascoc’s Olympic team selection policy can do to spoil a good party – as the winners are not going to Tokyo.