Here are some of the headlines in your City Press today: Mmusi dares critics to leave DA now DA leader Mmusi Maimane has dared those threatening to form a breakaway party to take their leave if they no longer identify with the party’s project. EFF questions powers of ‘rogue unit’ In the hundreds of pages of affidavits and arguments filed in court, Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan does not point to a specific statutory source of power to establish the ‘rogue unit’ with its extraordinary powers – so say lawyers for the EFF. I know my worth Kelly Khumalo reveals why she pulled out of the Lebo Mathosa biopic, saying she had found her own artistic platform. Zille concedes her tweets cost the DA Former DA leader Helen Zille has conceded that the row caused by her tweets in May could have contributed to the party’s electoral decline How Gavin Watson stole Bosasa from ANC Women’s League A new book details how the controversial businessman tricked the women into signing their company over. Prosecutor resists Cyril’s late filing resident Cyril Ramaphosa cannot make excuses that he could not find time to file his court papers, while in the same period he was involved in Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan’s legal cases, and even made time to defend himself against adverse findings by the Public Protector. This is according to a replying affidavit by a senior prosecutor. Funds for HIV, TB dry up donor and domestic funding for HIV programmes declined last year for the first time in a decade, falling by $1 billion (R15 billion) in low and middle-income countries. Winnie’s legacy in tatters A school named after late struggle icon Winnie Madikizela-Mandela does not have a single permanent structure built by the ANC-led government 23 years after the institution was established. Law enforcement hits crisis level This week, NPA head Shamila Batohi described a criminal justice system buckling in the face of rising crime and dismally low prosecution rates. ‘Think about #ImPaying not #ImStaying’ The founder of the #ImStaying movement has been told to forget the project and rather focus on #ImPaying, with his ex-sister-in-law publicly accusing him of failing to pay maintenance for his child. Wear these Nikes and Just Do It like Jesus Just like Jesus, you can now walk on water, literally. That’s if you have a few thousand rand to throw around. A company in New York has bought ordinary Nike Air Max takkies and has injected water from the River Jordan – where, according to the Bible, Jesus was baptised – into the air pockets in the shoes’ soles. ‘I’m an artist, even outside Idols’ Idols contestant Luyolo Yiba has mixed feelings about whether he would make it to the top five or not saying “If I win it’s going to be a bonus. I’m an artist even outside Idols.” Wits decision on medical students ‘political’ A political decision to consider reviewing an assessment method for medical students at Wits was allegedly among options to be debated internally following an outcry over its use. Wednesday is D-Day in Botswana Fierce campaigning marred by dramatic political wrangling, finger-pointing and discrediting tactics in the lead-up to Botswana elections. Centre of hope for Seoding’s survivors The White Door Centre is directly linked to the local police station as part of government’s new plan to tackle gender-based violence For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press today.