Here are some of the headlines in your City Press newspaper today: Intense jockeying for top DA posts Intense behind-the-scenes lobbying has begun for the top leadership positions in the division-wracked DA, with at least four leaders being pushed to take over from Mmusi Maimane. Malema and Shivambu stay as EFF cleans up A picture is beginning to emerge of a new EFF leadership that will keep leader Julius Malema and his deputy Floyd Shivambu in place but the rest of the top six will bite the dust. Battle for control of the lotto Control of the country’s biggest tender, the lottery operation, is set to pit Hosken Consolidated Investments and gambling power couple Eric and Charmaine Mabuza against each other. ANC’s big effort to reclaim Joburg from DA The ANC in Johannesburg has positioned itself to take advantage of the DA’s meltdown and the resignation of mayor Herman Mashaba to recapture control of the country’s financial hub. ‘I depended on alcohol to cope and survive’ Radio personality and Idols SA judge Unathi Nkayi reveals all in her forthcoming memoir – I keep learning – from her divorce to leaving Metro FM and being told she can’t sing. Uproar over sex education Teachers are threatening to boycott a new school curriculum that would see them teaching grade 7s about masturbation and require them to describe to Grade 8s what happens “during vaginal, oral and anal sex. We are sucking our country dry While everyone has been preoccupied with the recent bout of load shedding, our taps also appear to be running dry. In large parts of the country demand for water currently exceeds what is available. I’m not captured – Masina Ekurhuleni Mayor Mzwandile Masina says the coalition running the industrial zone in the east of Gauteng has outlived others formed in 2016 because it is based on principles, not “convenience or deals” Ex-Bok lock ordered to remove cameras from his house This week the 1995 World Cup winner’s estranged wife obtained an urgent interdict, compelling her husband to remove all the CCTV cameras in their house – because they infringe on his wife’s privacy. Angry supporters to march to Idols today over “rigged” votes Supporters of departed Idols SA twins Viggy and Virginia Qwabe have planned a march to today’s show at the SA State Theatre in Pretoria. Born to fail A damning new study has revealed how millions of children born in poor households in SA are likely to end up poor and jobless in the coming years – unless interventions are made now to improve the situation. Gobodo heads for Yokohama Stadium After his promising rugby dream was destroyed following an assault with a golf club, doused with petrol and set on fire, Qaphela Gobodo gets a chance to cheer for the Boks against Wales in Japan today. When sport and culture clash Last week’s soccer drama involving the wearing of isiphandla has elicited strong reactions. What happens when football rules reject cultural tradition? Limpopo in wrangle over IT tender Limpopo premier Stan Mathabatha has allegedly suspended a senior official who made it known that he would testify to the Zondo commission of inquiry into state capture about possible corruption in the province relating to a R585 million broadband connection tender. For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press today.