Deny, deny, deny. That was the theme for businesswoman Bridgette Motsepe-Radebe’s media briefing earlier in Johannesburg on Thursday. Motsepe-Radebe, whose name has cropped up in Botswana media her alleged interference in the country’s political sphere, has finally broken her silence. She has been accused money laundering, fraud, corruption, political manipulation and being involved in an alleged plot to overthrow the Botswana government led by President Mokgweetsi Masisi. Motsepe-Radebe, a mining magnate and the wife of former energy minister Jeff Radebe, slammed Botswana’s Sunday Standard newspaper, accusing them of false reporting and character assassination. Motsepe-Radebe, who was earlier this year slapped with travel restrictions by the Botswana government, has denied all the allegations. “I have never been involved in money laundering, the illicit outflow of capital, regime change or terrorism,” she said. According to reports by the Sunday Standard, Motsepe-Radebe was involved in a plan to have Masisi replaced by Pelonomi Venson Moitoi ahead of the Botswana Democratic Party’s elective congress earlier this year. She has threatened to sue Botswana newspapers for reporting what she said were untruths about her. Motsepe-Radebe challenged the media and the public to check with the relevant authorities and banks to see if she had indeed bankrolled any political projects in Botswana or any other thing that involves the movement of money between two countries. “My bank account is open for scrutiny by the authorities. I would welcome any official investigation by relevant authorities in South Africa, Botswana and elsewhere,” Motsepe-Radebe said. She also denied allegations of a romantic relationship with Botswana’s former president, Ian Khama. She said that the family friendship between the Khama and the Motsepe families goes back a long way. “Our fathers had a close friendship at Fort Hare University. There is no romantic relationship with Ian Khama.”   Journalist | City Press 