Here are some of the headlines in your City Press newspaper today: DA headed for showdown as Zille shocks SA As pressure mounts for him to be removed as leader and opposing camps gear up for a divisive and damaging clash, DA leader Mmusi Maimane warns attempts to turn the DA into a ‘narrow, minority party’ would be dangerous for the country Mboweni reforms get flak The ANC’s alliance partners staged a pushback against some of the key economic reforms punted by Finance Minister Tito Mboweni, warning that some Treasury proposals were a betrayal of the promise that the governing party made to the voters just recently at the May 8 general elections. Give me back my job The former head of the Gauteng Hawks, Prince Mokotedi, believes the labour court should force police top brass to reinstate him into the position he was moved from nine months ago. And now he has taken his former boss, Hawks head Godfrey Lebeya, to court, arguing that his “redeployment” was irregular, unlawful and amounted to automatic unfair dismissal. Bassie’s tell-all memoir In her memoir, Bassie: My Journey of Hope, businesswoman Basetsana Kumalo reflects on the abuse she says she suffered at the hands of former boxer Dingaan Thobela, a painful miscarriage she had and how she built her empire. Mashaba and Maile in verbal spat There is no letting up of the animosity between Johannesburg Mayor Herman Mashaba and Gauteng MEC for Human Settlements, Urban Planning and (Cogta) Lebogang Maile. The two are again butting heads over what Mashaba claims is Maile’s unwarranted flexing of his muscles on the Johannesburg administration. Official charged for backing Agrizzi on Facebook Correctional Services national commissioner Arthur Fraser has suspended a senior departmental manager and charged him with misconduct for voicing on social media his shock over Angelo Agrizzi’s revelations at the state capture commission of inquiry which resulted in him being reluctant to vote or campaign for the governing ANC in the May 8 general elections. Judge Potterill removed from PP’s case Pretoria High Court Judge Sulet Potterill has been taken off the case between Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane and State Security Minister Ayanda Dlodlo relating to the Sars rogue unit report and the review application of Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan. Killer’s art sparks outrage What should happen to the artistic work of a convicted murderer? Should it be hidden away, never to be seen and critiqued? Or can it be used to educate and highlight the contradiction between art and evil? That is the debate raging in the art world and activist circles after world-renowned painter and photographer Zwelethu Mthethwa – who is serving a prison sentence for murdering a sex worker – was included in an exhibition. ‘VBS needs our support’ The ANC’s controversial chaplain general Reverend Vukile Mehana has been accused of putting pressure on officials of a government’s statutory body to invest money in the now defunct VBS. Nigerians unhappy that Buhari failed to deliver President Muhammadu Buhari’s state visit to South Africa has left Nigerians living in the country with a bitter taste in their mouths, after the statesman’s decision not to demand reparations for victims of the recent xenophobic attacks. ‘SA had no jurisdiction to try me for bombings’ Convicted Nigerian terrorist Henry Okah is launching a court application seeking to declare that South Africa had no jurisdiction to try him for bombings in the strife-torn Niger Delta region. SA’s Tin Soldier tells his tale A new documentary on rare disease tells stories of courage and humanity. Threats and fear haunt state agency Allegations of internal strife and victimisation appear to have overtaken the core mandate of developing small and commercial media at a statutory development agency where an acting chief executive officer hired “a bodyguard” in fear of her own staff. ATM leader supports defamation claim African Transformation Movement (ATM) leader, Vuyolwethu Zungula, has thrown his weight behind ANC secretary general Ace Magashule and filed a supporting affidavit in the latter’s R500 000 defamation case against former general secretary of the SA Council of Messianic Churches in Christ (SACMCC), Buyisile Ngqulwana. . For more on these and other stories, get your copy of City Press today.