Teachers are threatening to boycott a new school curriculum that would see them teaching pupils in Grade 7 about masturbation and require them to describe to Grade 8 pupils what happens “during vaginal, oral and anal sex”. Parts of the new curriculum for life orientation between Grade 4 and Grade 12, which will be implemented in all schools from next year, was leaked to the media last week. Chris Klopper, president of the SA Teacher Union (SAOU), said they were shocked and that the material was “grossly insensitive”. They are advising teachers who do not agree with the content to boycott it. “[If] disciplinary action is taken by the department of education, SAOU will not hesitate in assisting its members with legal assistance and protection.” From a very early stage, pupils will encounter case studies in which adults assault children and in Grade 5, they will be given an example of “Max”, who is sexually assaulted by other boys at their school. They smack his butt and convince him to grab another boy’s private parts. Max immediately reports it to his teacher. Elijah Mhlanga, spokesperson of the department of education, did not react to a request for comment. Angie Motshekga, minister of basic education, writes in a preface guideline that government had begun to revise the curriculum as early as 2011 because the previous focus on HIV and pregnancy did not have the desired outcome. The department strongly promotes abstinence from sex until a suitable age is attained, she writes. Pupils will still be encouraged to put off having sex. But the curriculum had to be aligned with international standard guidelines drawn up by the UN’s education body, Unesco, in cooperation with leading experts in the field. Klopper said this was misleading. Earlier this year, when there were suggestions that masturbation would form part of the curriculum for Grade 4s, the SAOU held a meeting with teachers. “The documentation and examples that were presented to us six years ago, were relatively acceptable. After studying the latest examples we are unfortunately forced to conclude that we have been deliberately misled”. Paul Colditz, chief executive of the Federation for School Governing Bodies, was shocked. “What we see now was not shared with us so we could obtain insights from parents and does not appear to be age-appropriate, sensitive or value-driven.” Colditz said there would be another meeting with the department on November 27, and that a hard line would be taken. The Christian lobby group, For SA, shared examples of the material and expressed its outrage. In particular, they are opposed to the “normalisation” of homosexuality in the curriculum and “ideological preconceptions” with which they don’t agree.  City Press 